tonymacklin.net/content.php?cID=3
 
tonymacklin - ass:(855)
ID,aname,adate,alink,oID,autID,tID,mIDmain,mIDlist,ahost,aspecial,abody,aimage
1 Quantum of Solace 2008-11-13 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1470 1 17 5 1 1 1 0 Quantum of Solace is the most obtuse title of the year. Maybe it means kick-ass action. If so, it's a very apt title. Don't be late arriving at the theater. The pre-opening credit sequence to Quantum of Solace goes just 15 seconds before the action begins with a violent, careening, lethal car chase in Italy. It gets the heart racing. This 007 doesn't throw clever witticisms at his adversaries; this 007 kills them.
Forty-six years and 22 movies later, James Bond is still "The Man." Daniel Craig is right behind Sean Connery as the iconic James Bond. Quantum of Solace is Craig's second outing as 007; he debuted as Bond in Casino Royale (2006), which was a major international box office success.
Craig does many of his own stunts. Like Connery, Craig is a man's man; Pierce Brosnan was a woman's man, a lot of style and little substance. Roger Moore was 007 as The Saint.
Like Connery, Craig is a credibly human 007. He is a Bond who earns belief. No matter what the danger, he will jump, leap, fall, and soar to escape. Cars crash, boats explode, planes plummet, and a hotel becomes a conflagration. But Bond remains cool.
Quantum of Solace is the palpitating tale of how James Bond goes on a mission to reveal and destroy a nefarious group that -- under the guise of ecological protection -- is trying to control water at the planet's peril.
At the same time Bond is on a personal vendetta to find the villain behind Vesper Lynd, the woman who loved him, betrayed him, and died for him.
Bond is haunted by what happened to her. He's unable to sleep even after seven drinks. He has to come to grips with his conflicting feelings about Vesper. And he has to avenge her.
In a world of chaotic action, the movie is grounded by three performances. Craig is substantial, and Judi Dench is outstanding as M. Bond answers a queston about a woman (M) he is defending, "It's not what you think."
Questioner: "Your mother?"
Bond: "She likes to think so."
Bond is like a bad boy son to M, whom he often totally exasperates.
Also delivering a very human performance is Giancarlo Giannini, who plays Mathis, a character also from Casino Royale.
What has been missing from the Bond movies for a long time is a great villain like Auric Goldfinger, Blofeld, Scaramanga, or villainess Rosa Klebb. Also absent are henchmen like Oddjob or Jaws. The villainy in Bond films has become corporate and dulled. That's a real loss.
The writers, Paul Haggis, et al, do make an allusion to the death Jill Masterson (Shirley Eaton) in Goldfinger, but this time, it's oil not gold.
Director Marc Forster sometimes has a shaky hand. He directed the underwhelming The Kite Runner (2007). Forster enlists some of the people who worked on the Bourne movies, and the action sequences harken back to them.
Since there is no Bourne movie this year, Quantum of Solace will suffice. It's not as rich as the Bournes, but it has a lot in common with them.
Quantum of Solace is a travelogue of many lands; it was shot in Mexico, Panama, Italy, Chile, and other venues. One of the signature action battles is a gunfight at the Bregenz Festival House in Austria during a performance of Tosca. Opera rocks!
Craig as Bond is like Matt Damon as Bourne, a serious, credible avenger.
But unlike the Bourne movies, there is no footage from the previous movies to set the stage. If you don't remember Casino Royale, you're on your own. It would help to have footage of Vesper's drowning in the car with Bond unable to save her, but perhaps this seemed too much like Bourne.
Also, two major scenes occur off screen, the death in the desert of one villain and the end of Bond's crucial encounter with another villain that releases 007 from some of his demons. For such an in-your-face movie, these two voids are disconcerting.
Actually the title is not quite as obtuse as it may seem. Quantum of Solace is the title of a short story by Ian Fleming that was published in the collection For Your Eyes Only (1960). It is a story in which Bond and the governor of Nassau have a discussion about relationships.
The governor says, "I've invented a high-sounding title for this basic factor in human relations. I have called it the Law of the Quantum of Solace."
Bond replies, "That's a splendid name for it.. Quantum of Solace, the amount of comfort. Yes, I suppose you could say all love and friendship is based in the end on that."
When comfort ends, so does the relationship. It's time to go. But there's no reference to this in the movie.
I still think Quantum of Kick-Ass is a better title.
2 Changeling 2008-11-06 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1453 1 17 5 2 2,46,90,156,221,252 1 0 Clint Eastwood is a vital force of nature. Born May 31, 1930, the unflappable 78-year old director is still creating powerful, unique movies. Changeling is remarkable evidence of that.
What a career the man has had. No one would ever have imagined in 1954 when he appeared in a small part in Francis in the Navy that Clint would ever amount to anything in the movies.
Even in 1964 when Clint was the taciturn Man With No Name in Fistful of Dollars, it was difficult to imagine Clint behind the camera. Maybe one day he could helm simple action movies, but no way he would make significant works of art. But the Man With No Name has a Name that reverberates worldwide. And internationally he is a celebrated artist.
Clint Eastwood has won two Academy Awards for directing two Best Pictures of the Year, Unforgiven (1992) and Million Dollar Baby (2004). There is no director internationally that has had the run Clint has the last five years, Mystic River (2003), Million Dollar Baby (2004), Flags of Our Fathers (2006) and Letters from Iwo Jima (2006). Now Changeling fills Clint's winning full house.
Once again Eastwood tries something different. He goes back to an actual happening starting in 1928 and going well into the 1930s. And being an avid student of film, Eastwood pays homage to the strong, independent actresses and female characters of the movies of the 1930s.
Changeling is based, at times a little loosely, on an event that happened in Los Angeles. A young boy Walter was kidnapped while his mother Christine Collins was at work as switchboard supervisor at a phone company. The LAPD didn't act immediately, but eventually returned a boy to Christine; however, she insisted he wasn't her son. This resulted in a battle between the LAPD and the willful woman who kept refusing to accept that the boy was her son.
At the same time the police were drawn into a horrible murder case that involved young boys. Both cases collided with shocking results.
Changeling may be more of an audience picture than a reviewers' picture. On Rottentomatoes.com, Changeling only received a 53 percent favorable rating from reviewers.
Some reviewers reject Angelina Jolie, from her acting to her big, red lips. But Changeling is melodramatic in its homage to the movies of the 1930s, so at times Angelina is a broad broad. She does wear eye liner in the mental institution into which Christine is cast by the police. But, ladies, cut her a break. Her bright red lips are symbolic. They make her standout in a world that is somber.
Eastwood and his stellar director of photography Tom Stern use color that is washed-out, diffuse, and muted. The red lips of Christine Collins emphasize her boldness in a dark environment. I'm sure Clint likes the character of Christine Collins; she's his kind of character, sensitive and strong.
An apt allusion to the movies of the 1930s is that Christine roots for It Happened One Night to win the Oscar for Best Picture of 1934. (It won over Cleopatra. Claudette Colbert starred in both pictures, and she won Best Actress for her performance as the independent woman in It Happened One Night.) It's an odd coincidence that both Claudette Colbert and Christine Collins are CCs.
Other than Angelina Jolie and John Malkovich who plays the one-dimensional part of an evangelist ally of Christine, the rest of the cast is not big name.
Jeffrey Donovan (TV's Burn Notice) portrays the police captain J.J. Jones, who refuses Christine's pleas, and acts against her. Jason Butler Harner plays Gordon Stewart Northcott, the wretched, sadistic chicken farmer.
Eastwood's touch in casting actors who add humanity to their characters is seen in Michael Kelly, who plays a detective whom fate befalls, and Geoff Pierson,  who plays the attorney who fiercely defends Christine. Both characters have a palpable humanity.
Since Eastwood is an auteur we see personal strokes. His themes and style echo from film to film. In Changeling he creates his patented music: subdued piano and strings.
He cast his daughter Morgan in a cameo as a girl on a bicycle. When we see one scene at Bummy's Diner, we know that Clint is paying dear homage to his late long-time friend and colleague Henry Bumstead. (Even the role of Bummy in Changeling is played by actor J. P. Bumstead.)
When I interviewed Clint for Million Dollar Baby (Brightlightsfilm.com, Issue 47), he ended our interview by quoting Kris Kristofferson's line, "Freedom's just another word for nothing left to lose." Clint said, "That's a wonderful lyric." It's one he keeps reprising.
In Changeling he and writer J. Michael Straczynski utilize a form of that line when a character (the wonderful Amy Ryan) says to Christine about harsh language: that exactly when you use it is when "you've got nothing left to lose."
Clint's values are inviolate. Maybe it seems a bit strange to consider Clint as a moralist, but his movies continually focus on the hard struggle between good and evil, and how one finds redemption in a cruel world.
Two quibbles. I wish Clint hadn't decided to use Christine's last word. It's too obvious. And after the action has ended, we read on screen what has happened to the people. It's misleading, because two of the figures later were reinstated to their positions.
But overall, Changeling joins Chinatown (1974) and L.A. Confidential (1999) in brilliantly portraying a valiant attempt to fight against evil and corruption. It's a fight that Clint Eastwood knows will never end. For Clint, it's a fight worth forever fighting.
3 W 2008-10-30 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1378 1 17 5 3 3 1 0 W is the October surprise.
The movie won't change anybody's ideas about the values of the last eight years. But it may make some of us think differently about their protagonist.
If one expects -- or demands -- a Liberal screed against G.W. Bush, this is not the movie for him or her. If one wants a defense of the president or his actions, this is not the movie. If one goes with a closed mind, this movie will disappoint.
I always wondered how Bob Woodward in his lengthy meetings with G.W. for his books could take him seriously. Now I think I understand. Of all things, it took Oliver Stone to make me consider G.W. Bush in a different way.
By the end of W I still didn't want G.W. to be president, but I'd probably be comfortable having a beer with him.
Director Stone, writer Stanley Weiser (Wall Street,1987), and most of all, actor Josh Brolin humanize G.W. In the movie he's limited and self-serving, but he's also sincere, earnest, and engaging, with moments of quick wit. I never thought I'd say "wit" and "G.W." in the same sentence.
Early in the movie, he shows facility as he names nicknames of members at a drinking binge of a frat he is pledging. He's not wise, but neither is he without some smarts. But in his younger years he was a drinking fool.
It's obvious that the Bushes -- George Herbert Walker and Barbara -- were grooming their son Jeb to be governor of Florida and then president. To his father's and mother's chagrin, G.W. became the fly in the anointment.
With some evidence, Stone shows G.W. as the black sheep of the Bush family, not able to find his footing and continually disappointing his father, the 43rd president.
Josh Brolin is a marvel as G.W. Perhaps his and Stone's best decision was to deep-six the patented smirk that we've seen ad nauseum on TV. Brolin smirks only one or two times.
What is ironic is that Brolin also is the son of a successful father, actor James Brolin, so he can relate to a father's shadow. (A tidbit: both Josh and G.W. have moms named some form of Barbara. Josh's stepmom is Barbra Streisand.)
The rest of the cast comes close to matching the exemplary performance by Brolin. The "villain," of course, is Dick Cheney. Richard Dreyfuss nails the role, even capturing the gleam in Cheney's eye.
The person who receives the most dismissive treatment in the film is Condi Rice (Thandi Newton), who is portrayed as a weak sycophant to G.W.
Ellen Burstyn plays feisty and emotional Barbara Bush, who realizes that G.W. is more like her than his father.
James Cromwell is convincing as GHWB, the powerful, perceptive, and frustrated father.
Jeffrey Wright is Colin Powell, who is pulled in opposite directions by his loyalty to the president and his doubts. His last words to Cheney are, "F**k you, Dick." W is a PG-13 rated movie, so the f-bomb can be used only once. It's used well.
Stacy Keach, who hasn't had a good part in years, has a meaty role as G.W.'s evangelist mentor, Rev. Earle Hudd. Toby Jones looks the part of Karl Rove, but is a little too fey. It may be Stone's revenge to portray Rove as so slight.
The only bland, generic role is Laura Bush (Elizabeth Banks, Invincible, 2006), as the doting Laura. It's a missed opportunity.
Director Oliver Stone has a reputation as a wild-eyed liberal. But at his best, his art transcends his politics. His Nixon (1995) is perhaps his most underrated movie, because he tries to humanize his subject. W may face a similar fate.
Stone saves his most liberal-oriented moment until the credits, when he uses Bob Dylan singing "With God on Our Side."
Stone related his movie Nixon to Welles's Citizen Kane (1941); he seems to relate W to tragedy. Dubya even makes an allusion to Julius Caesar's being stabbed by an ally.
It's hard to see G.W. as a tragic hero; it's easier to see him like Willie Loman in a modern tragedy about a common man. It's also easier to see his father as the tragic figure. Greek tragedy, with the fall of its tragic hero, brings about the fall of a country. Oedipus brought a curse to his land.
In W in a nightmare, G.W. hears his father say to him, "You've ruined it, the Bush name, it took 200 years to build, and you ruined it."
Has G.W. led to the fall of a family dynasty? Or more?
W is not the stuff of tragedy. Or is it?
4 The Express 2008-10-23 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1370 1 17 5 4 4 1 0 The Express is running on two rails at the same time. There's sentiment, which is true. And there's sentimentality, which is not.
At its best, "The Express" is a moving tribute; at its worst, it's conventional manipulation.
Because it basically is set in the late 1950's and early 1960's, which was a racial cauldron, the movie has a serious responsibility. It is out to entertain, but also it is out to inform.
The time and place of "The Express" give it a palpable resonance that many sports movies lack.
"The Express" is the story of Ernie Davis, who was the first African-American to win the Heisman Trophy, as best college football player of the year. It's based on the life of the actual man, but it mythologizes him and sweetens the gridiron. It doesn't veer as badly into malarkey as many sports movies such as "We Are Marshall." But it can't help itself from making cheap, easy distortions that detract from its integrity.
The basic plot of "The Express" is about men caught in a time of social conflict and disruptive change in America. Both Davis (Ron Brown) and his coach Ben Schwartzwalder (Dennis Quaid) want to concentrate on football. Davis only wants to play football and is not political, but the times force him to recognize that he is a participant in the conflict.
Schwartzwalder just wants to coach football, but he too becomes effected by changing times and shaken values.
Ernie Davis was born in 1939 in the coal town of Uniontown, Penn., and when his mother married, he moves to Elmira, N.Y., and takes up football. He becomes a star.
Jim Brown, who had been star running back at Syracuse University, and his coach Ben Schwartzwalder recruit Davis, although the movie seems to overstate Brown's
involvement. Also, Schwartzwalder seems to suffer through a dismal season, losing to Holy Cross, but in truth, the loss to Holy Cross was their only loss in the regular season. "The Express" is full of such distortions.
There are a bunch of stock characters in "The Express," led by Pops (Charles S. Dutton), the wordly-wise grandfather. Guess what happens to him? If you've ever seen a movie, you'll know.
The other stock characters are Sarah (Nicole Beharie), the intelligent African-American coed at Syracuse; Will (Nelsan Ellis), the friend who is left back in Uniontown, working in the mines; and of course Jack (Omar Benson Miller), the large, good-natured teammate who always has a platitude and a supportive smile.
Rob Brown ("Finding Forrester," (2000), and "Take the Lead," (2006)) has a bland but winning personality. He portrays Ernie Davis as a very decent fellow. In "The Express," Davis has few edges and only occasional moments of volatility. Calmness dominates.
The actor who gives "The Express" its vigor is Dennis Quaid. Although it may seem as though he has played many coaches, this is his initial role as a coach. As Ben Schwartzwalder, who coached the Orangemen for 24 years, Quaid plays a man pulled by two different worlds, the old and the new. Like America, his character is undergoing an inevitable transition.
But director Gary Fleder and screenwriter Charles Leavitt, who adapted a book by Robert Gallagher, weren't satisfied to leave history alone. It seems filmmakers always think they need a "run, Forrest, run" sequence in their sports movies. They just can't allow an authentic moment to remain unimbellished.
In "Invincible" (2006), Mark Wahlberg played Vince Papale, who played for the Philadelphia Eagles. In reality Papale tackled a kick returner, who fumbled, and Papale recovered and ran for a short touchown. That in itself was terrifically dramatic. And authentic. But in the movie "Invincible," it was turned into a long TD run. Run, Forrest, run.
In "The Express" there are several such meaningless distortions. In the actual Cotton Bowl in 1960 when undefeated Syracuse played Texas, Ernie Davis caught a pass for an 87-yard touchdown. It was on the second play from scrimmage. But in the movie, it is put much later in the game for psuedo-dramatic purpose. And the pass seems to be a long heave that stays in the air forever. Then we get a distant shot that shows the play was mostly a run. Jeez.
But, perhaps, the most contrived element in "The Express" is the pivotal game at West Virginia in 1959. It is a bitter racial frenzy, with the fans throwing bottles and spewing viciously at the Syracuse players who had three African-Americans on the team. It is one of the most intense, provocative scenes in the movie. But guess what? There is only one problem. The game in 1959 was a home game at Syracuse. Not at West Virginia.
I know from personal experience that West Virgina was a hotbed of racial anger. When I went with the Villanova basketball team to a game in Morgantown, the fans screamed, "Is Villanova a Negro school?" Except they didn't say Negro.
But that game actually was at West Virginia.
There is also an irony in that years later, coach Ben Schwartzwalder was accused of discrimination by nine players who boycotted spring practice at Syracuse. What happened? Did Ben suffer a relapse?
What's bothersome about "The Express" is that it is a good movie based on truth, but it sells truth short. Ernie Davis and a significant era of America deserve better. The most galling thing about sports movies is when they take what is actually dramatic and twist it into inauthentic posing.
When in doubt, distort.
Run, Forrest, and Vince, and Ernie, run away from reality.
5 Body of Lies 2008-10-15 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1336 1 17 5 5 5 1 0 When Russell Crowe gives a lackluster performance, you know how meager a year it's been at the movies. In “Body of Lies,” Crowe is bogged down in a thankless role in a thankless movie.
“Body of Lies” is the story of a well-traveled, young, CIA agent Roger Ferris (Leonardo DeCaprio) who is trying to catch a terrorist leader somewhere in the Middle East. His orders come from his boss Ed Hoffman (Russell Crowe), in the USA. Ferris is on the run in foreign lands; Hoffman is on the cell phone in the suburbs.
Hoffman is detached from the action and believes that the end justifies the means. Ferris isn't sure. Their different experiences drive them to different ends. But, unfortunately, who cares? One wonders what is the point of “Body of Lies?” We've seen most of it many times before.
I think it's about time to stop giving director Ridley Scott a pass. He is a stylist, the visuals are effective, but he has forgotten what makes drama.
In last year's “American Gangster,” Scott didn't bring his two adversaries (played by Denzel and Crowe) together until the end of the film. In “Body of Lies,” there are a few encounters between Crowe and De Caprio, but Scott doesn't take full advantage of their animus. He seems to have forgotten that characters going face to face is dramatic. “Body of Lies” becomes the battle of the cell phones.
If Scott were to remake his “Thelma and Louise” (1991), he probably would have Thelma and Louise in separate cars.
Crowe's performance in “Body of Lies,” as the veteran government maven, is like a commercial for cell phones. See Russell multi-task. See Russell take his little boy to the bathroom while alking on the cell phone; see Russell in the car with his daughter while talking on a cell phone; see Russell by the pool in his suburban neigborhood while talking on his cell; see Russell at a kids' soccer game while talking on the cell phone. See Russell try to out act a cell phone.
Ed Hoffman (Crowe) is constantly talking with his best agent or to his spy satellite people as we see barren foreign land, so we get the idea that the suburbs of America and the Arab lands are a bit different. To further emphasize that there might be cultural difference, Crowe plays someone who is overweight, sloppy in dress, and totally without sympathy or loyalty to any one but himself. He is the Ugly American Cell Phoner.
Ridley Scott asked Crowe to gain 50 pounds for his role I guess to allow more Americans to relate to him. But this is no Robert De Niro in “Raging Bull;” it is Ridley's Bull.
One of Russell Crowe's great strengths as an actor is his ability to portray the noble spirit of his characters. Maximus in “Gladiator” (2000), Jeffrey Wigand in “The Insider” (1999), Jim Braddock in “Cinderella Man” (2005), and even  Ben Wade in “3:10 to Yuma.”
But Scott who directed Crowe in “Gladiator” discarded his actor's strength. He burdens Crowe with Ed Hoffman, who has no nobility of spirit. He has no spirit. It's a role fit for the late character actor J.T. Walsh, not Russell Crowe.
Leonardo De Caprio is the boy king of acting. He is likable, youthful, and energetic. But De Caprio has little ability to suggest motivation in his characters. We can fill in the blanks when he portrays Howard Hughes (“The Aviator,” 2004), and Scorsese surrounds him with action and great actors in “Gangs of New York” (2002) and “The Departed” (2006). But the script of “Body of Lies” by William Monahan doesn't help De Caprio find credible motivation.
In “Body of Lies” Roger Ferris is supposed to have a moment of truth, or several moments. Instead, Monahan (from a novel by David Ignatius) slaps in a contrived romance with an Arab nurse (another likable performer, Golshifteh Farahani), which leads Ferris to an absurd act, which goes against his character. A contrived romance leads to a more contrived climax. There is no basis for how Ferris suddenly spits the bit and goes off on an irrational venture. The ending is downright silly.
Ironically British actor Mark Strong as the urbane head of Pakistani Intelligence steals the scenes he's in. When he appears the film is interesting. There are two other very good scenes. One is a clever maneuver in the desert when the terrorists raise sand and confuse the eye in the sky. The most engaging scene is when Ferris meets the nurse's sister and her two boys. The kids inject a little bit of humanity and natural ease in a movie that otherwise lacks both.
But most of all “Body of Lies” is explosions, chases, deception, and infamy. It's a film without heart. Ferris tries to grow a conscience. Events bring it to a head.
But in “Body of Lies,” it's a fat head talking on a cell phone.
6 Paul Newman 2008-10-09 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1317 1 17 6 241,176,240,242,247,245,246,244,243 1 0 I remember seeing a clip a few years ago of Paul Newman, standing outside his dressing room trailer, angrily saying that he wasn't offered roles anymore. A year or two later, he officially retired from acting. If the blue-eyed boy was cantankerous, what hope was there for the rest of us?
Newman was a movie star par excellence. If he was frustrated in his later years, it was because Eddie Felson, Brick Pollitt and Hud Bannon inevitably had aged. The world had changed.
Paul Newman's characters were almost universally anti-establishment. Anti-establishment was a term that was prevalent in the 1960s and 1970s. I remember in the 1980s asking students who among them was anti-establishment. They looked at me blankly. No one was.
Newman's characters fought established systems, Billy the Kid and Butch Cassidy against western establishment, Cool Hand Luke against prison establishment, Frank Galvin against court establishment, Eddie Felson against pool establishment, Brick and Hud against family establishment and on and on.
Newman was a glib, cool lime sherbet presence. At times he was a moral man playing amoral characters, such as Hud and Buffalo Bill. Sometimes, as with Hud, their anti-establishment attitude was amoral and destructive, but most of the time Newman's character was simply a flawed individual fighting and resisting the established system. Behind the broad grin and mesmerizing blue eyes, there was a reservoir of latent anger.
Newman's characters often had a dark side. The fact that his son committed suicide, which he found out about when he was a visiting prof in the theater department at Kenyon College in Ohio, certainly added to the dark waters in his persona.
Newman seemed anti-establishment and lived in Connecticut. He won only one Oscar, but received nine nominations. It wasn't until he teamed up with director Martin Scorsese, at the time another non-Oscar-winning easterner, that he achieved an Academy Award for Best Performance for his reprisal of the role of Eddie Felson in "The Color of Money" (1986).
It's a solid performance, but not nearly as resonant and outstanding as his performance four years earlier in "The Verdict." Eddie Felson was flash; Frank Galvin in "The Verdict" was slow burn. A great irony is that Elizabeth Taylor, who starred with Newman in "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958), did not win an Oscar for her portrayal of Maggie, but won for a lesser performance in "Butterfield 8" (1960). Taylor should have won for Cat; Newman should have won for "The Verdict."
The one performance by Newman that is almost always overlooked may be his best. It certainly is his most daring. Newman and iconoclastic director Bob Altman got together to make "Buffalo Bill and the Indians" (1976), a movie trashing image. Especially Newman's own. Audiences couldn't accept it.
"Buffalo Bill and the Indians" was inspired by the ee cummings poem in which the final line is, "How do you like your blue-eyed boy, Mister Death?"
Newman portrayed William Cody as a fraud. His performance is a brilliant dissection of image.
I never interviewed Newman, but I went to the press conference in New York City for "Buffalo Bil and the Indians." The woman whom I brought to the press conference went ga-ga over Newman. Somehow, throughout the conference, he had sunglasses dangling from his ear. "That's so cool," she gushed. And it was.
Later Altman phoned me privately to talk about the press conference. I had gotten up and asked him a question about the unity of the movie which seemed problematic, and Altman at the press conference had said there would be no changes. But later he called me and said he was changing the film and putting the scene I had questioned at the end of the movie. It changed the movie entirely, and gave Newman's performance new emphasis and a power it hadn't had. It may have been the best lesson I ever had about the importance of editing.
As a would-be iconoclast, I always appreciated Newman's courage in exposing image. It was like a politician telling the truth. But, as usual, the truth was overrated. The audiences rejected it.
Paul Newman was an actor who had a movie star's image, but he was also an actor who bravely told human truth no matter what. paulnewman
7 Ghost Town 2008-10-02 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1255 1 17 5 6 6 1 0 Ricky Gervais has become a major international star. The British comic created and was the lead actor in the original British TV version of The Office (2006) and Extras (2007). He has won two Emmys and a Golden Globe. Now after a few bit parts his distinctive persona has made it in full dyspepsia to movie screens.
In a sense, Gervais is Everyman. His cheeky vulnerability is a staple of his persona. His characters have a cranky sense of superiority, but their egos lead them into inevitable failures and blunders. Their egos crash on the mean pavements of everyday life. But a characteristic that separates the persona of Gervais from most contemporary comic actors is his intelligence. His characters have intelligence, and they know it, which makes their faux pas even more embarrassing.
In Ghost Town his character says, “I like Sting, because you can hear he's intelligent in his lyrics.” His persona has a vocabulary that would baffle a President. He's a cynic, and since a cynic is a failed idealist, you know he's failed. A lot.
In a memorable episode of Extras, in a club David Bowie makes up a song mocking Gervais' character Andy Millman in a classic putdown. You laugh as you cringe as Millman is annihilated. That is the nature of Gervais' persona.
Ghost Town is a lark of a movie with a very likable cast and a smart script. It's the story of Bertram Pincus (Gervais), a dentist living in Manhattan who holds everybody in disdain. When Pincus undergoes a minor procedure at a hospital, a problem with the anesthetic causes him to die for about six minutes. After leaving the hospital, oblivious to what has happened to him, he begins to see people that no one else does. They're dead.
Pincus returns to the hospital to get help for his “hallucinations,” and eventually realizes the anesthesia mishap. He is followed by a mob of the dead, which approaches the size of a Verizon mob, who have unfinished business on earth and need his help. He rebuffs them, but one ghost, Frank Herlihy (Greg Kinnear) says if Pincus helps him, he will make the mob go away.
Frank is zealously committed to breaking up a developing relationship between his widow Gwen (Tea Leoni) and her new boyfriend, whom he can't stand. His wife is an Egyptologist, and Pincus is able to help her in her vocation. He and Gwen embark on a fitful, therapeutic friendship.
Like many of the best ghost fables, Ghost Town is both clever and sentimental. The tradition of ghost movies is a rich one: The Ghost and Mrs. Muir (1947), Ghost (1990), and The Sixth Sense (1999).
Even though it's not about possession as the following are, the tone of Ghost Town is more reminiscent of Steve Martin's All of Me (1984), Here Comes Mr. Jordan (1941) which was remade by Warren Beatty into Heaven Can Wait (1978), and Switch (1991) with Ellen Barkin's great performance.
The cast of Ghost Town is talented and appealing. Kinnear, as always, is very human, even as a ghost. The undervalued Leoni adds spunk to her character of the confused widow. But basically Ghost Town is Gervais' movie. As Pincus, Gervais frowns peevishly, smiles nervously, and sighs wearily, the only thing barely alive in a universe of boredom.
As always, Gervais is a vessel of broken intelligence. He also does some masterly physical bits. His sequence of gagging as a huge dog stands by his chair is a comic gem.
Unfortunately the ending of Ghost Town seems as though it may have been changed after sneak previews. A central character (with flowers) disappears suddenly as though he were cut in a spur of the moment decision.
Ghost Town is co-written and directed by David Koepp. Until the conclusion, Koepp keeps matters going through snappy paces. But the ending that's left seems truncated. It's not bad, but it lacks smoothness and coherence, as though it may be an after thought. A Ricky Gervais' character wouldn't expect anything else.
8 Righteous Kill 2008-09-25 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1229 1 17 5 7 7 1 0 Righteous KillImagine this conversation
A phone call between actor Bob De Niro and director Marty Scorsese
Bobby: Hello, Marty. I've been calling and texting, but you never answer.
(Silence)
Bobby: I'm talking to you. Are you talkin' to me? Are you talkin' to me?
Marty: I've been busy, Bob.
Bobby: Yeah, your Oscar.
Marty: Yes, I finally got one.
Bobby: Oh, that's right. For “The Departed.” Your first. You didn't get an Oscar for “Raging Bull” like I did. Who beat you? I forget.
Marty: Robert Redford for “Ordinary People.”
Bobby: Oh, yeah. The actor.
Marty: He's directed.
Bobby: That really stung. Didn't Thelma get an Oscar for “Raging Bull,” too?
Marty: Yes, Bob.
Bobby: Yeah, Best Actor and Best Editor. Thelma also got an Oscar for editing “The Aviator,” didn't she? The editor and the director almost always win for the same picture.
Marty: Yes, Bob. Why did you call?
Bobby: I thought you might have a project for the two of us. We made nine movies together, but not since “Casino” 13 years ago.
Marty: We've gone our separate ways.
Bobby: I did “Meet the Parents” and “Analyze This.” They showed my range.
Marty: Yes. You scowled and grinned. You really shouldn't grin, unless you want to play “I Am Sam.”
Bobby: I've got a good grin. Did you see my latest movie?
(Silence)
Bobby: “Righteous Kill.”
Marty: I saw your “Stardust,” “Arthur and the Invisibles,” “Hide and Seek: and “Godsend.”
Bobby: You should see “Righteous Kill.”
Marty: I really don't want to see a movie without a director and without a script.
Bobby: You did see it. Pacino and I showed how you can work wthout a director or a script. We did some sweet improv.
Marty: To be frank, I think you did “Righteous Kill” to try to prove that a good director is unnecessary.
Bobby: It had a director, Jon Avnet.
Marty: Avnet directed “Fried Green Tomatoes.” He made you and Al into Fried Green Pasta.
Bobby: Avnet is from New York.
Marty: Yeah, Brooklyn. Not the old neighborhood.
Bobby: The script was by Russell Gewirtz who did Spike Lee's “Inside Man.”
Marty: You always did like contrivance, didn't you, Bobby? Lines such as, “I hate scumbags” and “Is it killin' time, or is he just killin'
time?”
Bobby: Another character said that.
Marty: Gewirtz is a long way from Paul Schrader. Remember the dialogue in “Taxi Driver” and “Raging Bull?”
Bobby: What's Di Caprio got that I ain't got? He couldn't play Jake La Motta.
Marty: He made a great Howard Hughes in “The Aviator.”
Bobby: He played him as a twerp. He's a twerp. Remember how much weight I put on to play Jake La Motta; Di Caprio couldn't even grow fingernails.
Marty: Leonardo is fine.
Bobby: I think you keep casting him because he reminds you of Liza Minnelli. Talk about “The Departed.”
Marty: Don't be jealous.
Bobby: You never wanted me to play love scenes. In “Righteous Kill” I got a steamy sex scene.
Marty: Old steamed ham.
Bobby: What?
Marty: Nothing. Bob, Carla Gugino is 28 years younger than you.
Bobby: So?
Marty: You're turning into Gary Cooper.
Bobby: I could have played Frank Costello in “The Departed.” Jack Nicholson. Jack? You'll do anything for an Oscar. I'm surprised you didn't cast Clint Eastwood.
Marty: I'm going to hang up now.
Bobby: What about making “Taxi Driver, Part 2”?
Marty: I don't think so.
Bobby: Sequels sell. “Meet the Fockers,” “Analyze That.” Right now Gewirtz is writing “Inside Man 2.”
Marty: I don't think so.
Bobby: You're the man who does remakes. “The Departed” is a remake of a Hong Kong movie.
Marty: The world has changed. The business has changed. It's not the 1960s, the 1970s, or even the 1980s. “Mean Streets” have become Main Streets, Bob. Our kills weren't righteous. They were unique, visceral, and personal. They were one of a kind. “Righteous Kill” is run-of-the-mill.
At the other end of the line, there seems to be the faint sound of sobbing.
9 Burn After Reading 2008-09-18 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1194 1 17 5 8 8 1 0 Please send Get Well cards to the Coen Brothers. After last year&#39;s "No Country for Old Men," for which they won the Oscar for Best Picture of the Year, Joel and Ethan Coen have had a relapse.
Their new offering "Burn After Reading" is reminiscent of "The Ladykillers" the Coen Brothers' bomb with Tom Hanks in 2004. "Burn After Reading" is "The Ladykillers, Part 2." It has star power, but it fizzles.
It's hard to understand how the collaborative duo that made such a dynamic, impressive film as "No Country for Old Men" could squander their next opportunity so abjectly. Two or three chuckles do not make a comedy. "Burn After Reading" is a shallow diversion.
"Burn After Reading" is a fitful, lurching would-be comedy about espionage. Osbourne Cox (John Malkovich) gets demoted from his position at the CIA and decides to write his memoirs. Linda Litske (Frances McDormand) desires four different cosmetic surgeries. Is McDormand's husband Joel Coen trying to tell her something? But Linda's HMO won't pay for the treatments. So when she and Chad (Brad Pitt), a co-worker at a fitness center, get hold of a CD with Cox's info on it, they decide to sell it back to him, to the Russians, or maybe to the dopey Alaskans. This is no Ninotchka. It&#39;s more Nincompoops.
Chaos ensues. Not funny chaos, just chaos. At times the Coens seem to suffer from arrested development. They love to be quirky, but many of their quirks seem to be dated. They have characters continually lob f-bombs. But after a while George Clooney, Tilda Swinton, Frances McDormand and John Malkovich exhaust profanity, and it becomes a weak gimmick.
I realize there is something enticing about casting actors in roles that are not their usual images, but talented actors should be given good material, no matter what their roles. The Coen Brothers sell them short.
"Burn After Reading" has a great cast, but they are blunted by mediocre material.
The only part that has any range is Osbourne Cox, and Malkovich nails it as usual. How far Frances McDormand has fallen. She won an Oscar in her husband's "Fargo," but as Linda she is given little with which to work; she was given much more by other writers and another director in this year's "Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day."
Brad Pitt has zestful fun as Chad, the not-very-bright personal trainer who jives to music on his head phones. But it's a role that could be played by Rob Schneider or Pauly Shore.
As always George Clooney is good-natured in the skimpy role as Harry, a man who loves sex. Clooney's goodnaturedness is wearing thin. These days he often coasts. He has a lot of mediocre movies in his wake. The Clooney role could be cut from the film without any loss at all.
In "Burn After Reading" the Coens have become toneless. Joel co-directs and co-writes with brother Ethan. They edit the movie under the pseudonym of Roderick Jaynes. Their best movies, "No Country for Old Men" (2007), "Fargo" (1996), "Raising Arizona" (1987), and "Barton Fink" (1991) all have a strong sense of place and people. The very popular slacker-comedy "The Big Leibowski" (1997) has a strong performance that holds it together.
But at their worst the Coens are skitterish and even bland. Bland quirkiness, such as in "Burn After Reading," is not worth much.
Seeing "Burn After Reading" I felt like I was invited to a party on screen where all the other guests already had a buzz on. It made them think they were much funnier than they were. They thought they were a f**king riot. Maybe they should hand out bongs with your tickets.
10 Transsiberian 2008-09-11 http://freeweekly.com/?p=1150 1 17 5 9 9 1 0 This has been the summer of my cinema discontent. I've felt like Sarah Palin killing caribou on a bridge to nowhere. There are carcasses all over the place.
But every once in a while an offbeat movie comes along that is a surprise. Last week it was "Bottle Shock." This week it is  "Transsiberian."
I went to see "Bottle Shock" primarily because one of my favorite actors, Alan Rickman, is in it. I went to see "Transsiberian" primarily because one of my favorite actresses, Emily Mortimer, is in it. Both movies prevail beyond the performances of their respective leads.
"Transsiberian," like 2007's "The Lookout," is one of those films that stay with you. Maybe it's the snow.
In an age of cookie-blaster CGI, the feeling of "Transsiberian" is unique and palpable. Photographed by Xavi Gimenez on location in Lithuania, Spain, and China, the frigid terrain is a character. So too is the old Transsiberian train that slowly and relentlessly crosses the frozen tundra on its seven-day journey from Beijing to Moscow.
As the USSR deteriorated, so did the legendary train. It's now cramped with stolid peasants, loud and boisterous men who love their vodka and backpackers who travel in tight quarters and have to eat bad food. The train is old and worn, but it's still a prime vehicle for mystery.
On the train going from China to Moscow are a married couple from the United States. The husband Roy (Woody Harrelson morphing occasionally into Dagwood) and his wife Jessie (Emily Mortimer) are returning from a church-sponsored activity, teaching children in China.
Roy is earnest and gregarious; he owns a hardware store in Iowa and has a train set in his basement. Jessie -- who had a wild youth -- is a gifted amateur photographer who continually takes pictures on their trip. She's still restless. Roy wants children, but she seems reluctant.
Joining Roy and Jessie in their small four-berth cabin on the train are two backpackers, Spaniard Carlos (Eduardo Noreiga) and his younger American girlfriend Abby (Kate Mara), an enigmatic vagabond from Seattle.
Joining the train in mid-transit is Grinko (Ben Kingsley), a fatalistic, Russian narcotics cop. The  travelers and the cop get involved in a plot of intrigue and treachery.
Director/co-writer Brad Anderson, who studied Russian in Russia and took the famous train in the 1980s, creates a mood that is dark and evocative. Some of the photography is unnecessarily dark, but perhaps this contributes to the moral myopia.
Unfortunately the character of Roy is not as motivated as he may have seemed on paper, so the moral dichotomy and motivation are not as exact as they should be. Roy is more silly than moral, and his decision to lie does not have the effect it should have.
But Anderson creates moments that are riveting, although at times he veers into the unbelievable. When Jessie snatches her camera away from the cop just in the knick of time, it strains credibility. But as Hitchcock once told me, "Logic is dull."
Anyone with an imagination should guess most of the twists, but there still are a few surprises. And Anderson has learned suspense from the  master, Sir Alfred. Anderson also utilizes many of Hitch's themes: fear of the police, voyeurism, lack of communication, and someone on the run. He uses them to potent advantage.
Mortimer simmers, smolders, and crackles as the restless woman who becomes desperate. She gives one of the best performances of the year.
Kingsley adds world-weary gravitas as the Russian cop. Harrelson is serviceable in an incomplete role. The train outacts him.
"Transsiberan" takes us on a journey into moral wilderness. I think Hitch would buy a ticket to this grueling and haunting ride.
91 Reign Over Me 2007-03-29 http://freeweekly.com/?p=177 1 17 5 83 83 1 0 Reign Over Me is like spending two hours with a shrink.
Self-absorbed and repetitive, it has an occasional moment of truth, and a lot of hot air.
Actors Don Cheadle and Adam Sandler provide the occasional moments of truth and writer-director Mike Binder provides the hot air. It's an oppressive blend.
Reign Over Me is the story of two former college roommates who come across each other in Manhattan many years after college. One is unhappy; the other is traumatized -- so they both need renewed friendship and what it might bring to their lives.
Alan Johnson (Don Cheadle) is a dentist with a very successful practice in New York. He has a wife (Jada Pinkett Smith) and two daughters, but his relationship with his wife unsettles him.
She dominates him and has him doing things with her he doesn't enjoy, such as taking photography classes and doing picture puzzles. But he goes along and pretends he likes the hobbies. He has no male friends. His life is stuck in neutral.
One day Alan sees his former college buddy Charlie Fineman (Adam Sandler) walking on the street but can't reach him. Later he again sees Charlie -- this time on a scooter -- and he gets his attention. Charlie says he doesn't remember Alan; he seems not to remember anything from his past. Alan insists they have coffee together, and their relationship begins to become rekindled.
Charlie is a mess. He is a refugee from horrible pain. Alan has read in the newspaper that Charlie's family -- his wife, three daughters, and their poodle (Binder can't help himself) -- were killed in a plane crash on 9/11.
Charlie completely avoids talking about his family and goes into a rage whenever anything starts to remind him of them. He lives in a self-imposed cocoon, only letting his landlady and business manager (played by Binder) have anything to do with him. He has no friends.
Alan and Charlie begin to count on each other for support, and their odd couple relationship evolves.
Writer-director Binder created HBO's The Mind of the Married Man, and too often he goes the way of the easy gimmick or the forced resolution. Binder is not enough of a realist. He tries to handle heavy themes, and he keeps floundering awkwardly under their weight. He loves to rig and contrive too much.
In Reign Over Me, people meet coincidentally all the time. There are also plot contrivances. The landlady enters Charlie's apartment at a key moment saying a neighbor complained about a loud TV, despite the fact that it has played all through the movie.
Charlie even has played drums to loud music to no complaint. That is until we need a concocted reason for the landlady to appear. And, never have the streets of New York been so empty.
In a patented, terribly contrived courtroom hearing, the judge (Donald Sutherland) allows misconduct and then later vehemently opposes it. No, his name isn't Gonzales.
And, of course, cheap sentimentality wins out. Nasty people suddenly become sweethearts.
Reign Over Me is teeming with lapses of credibility.
The cast struggles mightily to overcome the lapses, with erratic results. Back at the dentist's office a ditzy woman (Saffron Burrows) has a thing for Alan Johnson's johnson. She wanders aimlessly throughout the movie trying to decide whether to smile or become a serial killer.
At home, Jada Pinkett Smith spends most of the time waiting for her role to make sense or at least to give her something more to do than holding a cell phone to her ear.
Don Cheadle flip-flops his way through a disconcerting part, but at least he is a genuine actor, even when the part is disingenuous.
Adam Sandler -- that clown with a heart that mumbles -- plays Charlie Fineman as a mixture of Bob Dylan and Bozo.
Liv Tyler looks uncomfortable playing a psychiatrist.
You know that any movie that dredges up Robert Klein (he plays Charlie's father-in-law) is in deep trouble.
Donald Sutherland, as the judge, tries to bring dignity to a role that doesn't deserve it.
Binder is the kind of director that attracts good actors like Kevin Costner and Joan Allen in The Upside of Anger, and then wastes them. Binder's major trait is that he has a sit com's sense of life.
Reign Over Me seems as though it is a collection of sit com characters who have been trapped in a serious movie and are trying to get out.
They don't make it.
92 300 2007-03-22 http://freeweekly.com/?p=169 1 17 5 84 84 1 0 300 is a fun-fest of blood, mayhem, and absurdity.

At its best, it is entertaining; when it's not at its best, it's pretty dumb. It's pretty dumb much of the time.

300's best qualities are the CGI -- vivid, imaginative, monumental battles -- the limited but effective performance by Gerard Butler as King Leonidas, and the iconoclastic spirit of graphic novelist Frank Miller.

300's worst qualities are the ponderous repetition of visual effects, the hack hack-'em-up script by three writers, and the god-awful performance by Lena Headey as Queen Gorgo. The negative qualities devour many of the positive qualities like a berserk CGI monster-rhino.

300 is the tale of the Battle of Thermopylae in 480 B.C. when 300 Spartan warriors, supplemented by volunteers from the Greek city states, created havoc against Xerxes' massive army from the Persian Empire. The volunteers -- made up of sculptors and potters -- left the 300 to fight the last battle alone. On the surface it's a noble effort. It's also adolescent and masturbatory.

Director Zach Gordon, who  contributed to the script, has an evocative eye for beasts-gone-wild and gore. At the end of the movie the credits should announce, "We harmed a multitude of CGI animals. Take that, PETA!"

Gordon exhibits a flair, but style with hackneyed substance has a limited threshold. We literary types who attempt to be "with it" often give the graphic novel a pass. But the graphic novel seems to have severe limitations.

Frank Miller, who composed Sin City and 300, has a brash, irreverent sensibility. But he's a craftsman, not an artist; his words do not keep up with his images.

Miller has some of the same gifts as Mickey Spillane, who once took pulp detective novels to great heights of popularity.

In 300 the heroic captain says: "I have filled my heart with hate."

Leonidas responds, "Good."

Mickey would love that.

What saves some of the pedestrian dialogue is Gerard Butler as Leonidas. He scowls and yells a lot, but at least  he tries to invest his character with a vestige of personality. It's a bit depressing to see this actor -- who was so human in Dear Frankie -- limited by a mask in The Phantom of the Opera and the blue screen of 300.

Dominic West (of TV's The Wire) is miscast as the nefarious politican Theron. But the worst -- the film's fatal flaw -- is the headless performance of Lena Headey as Queen Gorgo, the wife of King Leonidas.

Granted the three writers have witlessly expanded the Queen's part in the movie 300 with wretched, banal dialogue, but she is perfectly suited to deliver it wretchedly and banally.

The writers probably wrote about her in their basements, where a real woman never ever appeared. Their concept is a blow-up doll -- blown-up with platitudes and plastic.

Queen Gorgo seems modeled on Katherine Harris of Florida. It's no wonder Leonidas went running away to war. But I wouldn't even fight traffic for her.

300 is another canard that turns "freedom" into all-purpose cliche. The Queen is just another warmonger prostituting "freedom." When she lectures the council (sure she would) about freedom, it has even less impact than if she was an out-of-her-depth pack leader lecturing Brownies or Cub Scouts.

Headey is an aberration -- a Britisher who can't act. Really can't act. She probably belongs at a frat party on campus. There she'd fit in.

300 is like whooping collegians at a frat party. They're having boisterous fun, but the beer goes flat. They guzzle it anyway.

300 is a cheap drunk.
93 Zodiac 2007-03-15 http://freeweekly.com/?p=159 1 17 5 44 44 1 0 Zodiac is a thinking person's film. It isn't a mass audience movie.
Although it received an 85 from critics as compiled by Rottentomatoes, Zodiac opened weaker than expected at the box office.
Audiences expecting Zodiac to be a cackling maniac wielding a bloody saw will be disappointed. Zodiac has a few thrills, but it is not a thriller. Those looking for a movie that challenges will find a lot in Zodiac to decipher.
Directed by masterly David Fincher, Zodiac is full of meaningful themes and
significant style. It is a deceptively textured film. The script -- which is full of intriguing dualities -- was written by James Vanderbilt, based on books by Robert Graysmith.
Zodiac is the story of the real-life serial killer who terrorized Northern California from the late 1960s through the early 1970s. The film begins with Zodiac's attack on July 4, 1968, on a young couple in a parked car in an isolated area on the outskirts of Vallejo, Calif.
We switch to the newsroom of the San Francisco Chronicle, and a meeting of the editorial staff that is interrupted by the delivery of a letter from someone who calls himself Zodiac. In the letter he identifies himself as a killer and demands his correspondence be printed on the front page or he will go on a rampage of killing. The letter is accompanied by the portion of a cryptogram that Zodiac says will identify him.
Editorial cartoonist Robert Graysmith (Jake Gyllenhaal) -- who later wrote two books about Zodiac -- and crime reporter Paul Avery (Robert Downey, Jr.) become swept up in the massive hunt for Zodiac.
The police investigation is led by William Anderson (Anthony Edwards) and David Toschi (Mark Ruffao).
Zodiac follows the chase, its effects, and its psychological cost on those who can't let it go.
Downey is his usual sardonic, irrepressible self, Gyllenhaal and Edwards are convincing and Mark Ruffalo gives the best performance he's given since You Can Count on Me. The rest of the cast is first-rate.
But even more important than cast in a Fincher film are theme and tone. One of the most important themes in Zodiac is the relationship between the past (the late 1960s and early 1970s) and the present. The past is almost a foreign country its tools are so different from today, but Zodiac and his influences were precursors of the present.
Zodiac was a harbinger of the celebrity culture. He was a master of self-promotion, and the media rushed to make him a figure that would terrify the public. Things haven't changed.
Nancy Grace, Glenn Beck, Geraldo, Anderson Cooper, et al. would be absolutely orgasmic if they had a chance to babble about Zodiac.
Fincher also reveals how drastically the world has changed electronically from the 1970s. In Zodiac, one character has to run outside to a phone booth in the rain to make a phone call. The first Atari video game -- the rudimentary PONG -- plays on a TV. Now shrill cell phones and bombastic video games are everywhere. Books are not.
And in Zodiac the different police departments are unable to communicate basic information because they don't have the equipment to do so.
But the irony --  remember this is Fincher -- is that what hasn't changed in the 21st century is the flow of misinformation, misinterpretation and downright mendacity. Better tools, same old falsity. It's simply more sophisticated.
Fincher also emphasizes the beginning of the squandering of due process of law. Some of the cops in the film try to hold on to that slippery concept, but Dirty Harry is in the theatres. Dirty Dick and Incurious George will hold sway in the future.
One of the stars is the production designer Donald Graham Burt, who creates a look of normalcy and ordinariness, often drab, sometimes dingy. The prime suspect, although a child molester, appears very ordinary.
Burt uses orange and taupe (brownish gray) to color this world. Amber, the color of warning, dominates. Shirts, a VW car, furnishings and a crucial chair are all orange. The look of the picture is one of the major characters.
Zodiac is a movie about a serial killer, but it's more about the world we lived in and live in. As one of the police officers says about capturing Zodiac, "What if, what if, what if . . . ?"
It's an age-old question. It's Fincher's anthem.
In Zodiac, David Fincher creates a world of anxiety and confusion. It reverberates all the way to the present.
94 The Astronaut Farmer 2007-03-08 http://freeweekly.com/?p=152 1 17 5 85 85 1 0 The Astronaut Farmer is one of those movies that you don't believe for a moment while you're watching it, but you leave with a warm glow. But by the time you've driven home, you realize you've been conned.
It's one of those synthetic-looking soft drinks -- a cinema Slurpy. There's an artificial sugar high. Then a severe letdown.
The Astronaut Farmer is space-age schmaltz. It's a feel-good movie that fakes it.
The Astronaut Farmer is the very hokey story of Charles Farmer (Billy Bob Thornton), a former NASA-trainee who left the space program when his father committed suicide. Probably from an overdose of saccharine.
Farmer returned to the family ranch in the small town of Story, Texas. Get it? Story, Texas. God, that's not clever. But it's the level of wit in this movie -- a billboard outside town says, "Space Available."
The only irony is that The Astronaut Farmer, which takes place in Texas, was shot in New Mexico, which is a telling sign of the film's displacement.
Farmer builds a rocket in the barn on his ranch and plans to ride it into space. His wife and three children worship this man with a plan. They coo and giggle like a family of chickens.
Farmer, of course, has trouble with the bank, the Department of Home Security, the FBI, NASA, the FAA and the Bureau of Dopiness. But he is not to be dissuaded from his dream. Logic is not his co-pilot.
Farmer's wife Audrey (Virginia Madsen) says, "Without the rocket, we're just a dysfunctional family." No, they don't name the rocket Jesus. But the mantra of this ersatz gospel is Farmer's hoary line, "If we don't have our dreams, we have nothing." Really?
The most remarkable thing about this unremarkable movie is that it was made by identical twins Mark and Michael Polish. The brothers wrote The Astronaut Farmer, and Michael directed it.
It's a family affair. Two of the Polish clan's daughters (Jasper and Logan) play Farmer's two daughters in the movie. Their characters' names are Stanley (after Kubrick or Livingston?) and, of course, Sunshine (after cliche).
The son (Max Thieriot) is named Shepard (after Alan Shepard). He becomes mission control for his father's flights. In this elastic premise, a second rocket ship quickly can be built, if the first one doesn't make it. And a 15-year old shall lead them.
The Astronaut Farmer tries to be Frank Capra in the 21st century. When an astronaut gets his wings, a dull thud sounds.
Billy Bob Thornton gets the role that Gary Cooper would get if he were alive. Unfortunately Thornton can't use his patentedly bemused look; his character is too gung-ho for that. Thornton's performance makes one yearn for just a moment of Bad Santa's nastiness.
Thornton's Farmer has Andy Griffith's laid-back, down-home nature, but it's wed to Barney Fife's pie-in-the-sky schemes. Farmer probably should be played by the late Don Knotts.
Virginia Madsen smiles, grins, chuckles and twitters in a thankless role as the adoring wife of a dreamer. When she suddenly caws, it seems too abrupt and out of character.
The Astronaut Farmer has a promising cast of actors who often play oddball characters. Besides Thornton, there are Bruce Dern, Tim Blake Nelson and J.K. Simmons, but they're all neutered. The flapjacks on the griddle have more personality. Dern has never been as drab and limited.
The Rovian message of The Astronaut Farmer is "dreaming is good." Buy a Hallmark Greeting Card instead. Everything else in this culture is being dumbed-down, so the makers of The Astronaut Farmer decided to dream. They dumbed-down space.
95 Ghost Rider 2007-03-01 http://freeweekly.com/?p=142 1 17 5 86 86 1 0 Seeing Ghost Rider is like going to Saturday matinee serials at the Rialto eons ago.

It's a fanciful, puerile experience -- a fun day out for 9-year olds. Ghost Rider is a ridiculous melange of cheesy effects, talentless extras, corny plot and insipid music.

It's basically an unimaginative battle between good and evil. But it's certainly no worse than Buck Rogers. It's got its moments. And it's in color. Blessedly there are no quotes in the ads for Ghost Rider.

The studio didn't preview the movie until the last minute, and they didn't use crass, Mephistophelian hacks such as Pete Hammond or talk schmo host Larry King to vulture their wares.

Without the reviewers' quotes, Ghost Rider topped the box office with more than $50 million for the four-day Presidents Day weekend. Maybe studios will realize they don't need these buffoons.

Ghost Rider is the story of Johnny Blaze, a young man who sells his soul to the devil to save his dad. Mephistopheles sends him to Iraq -- oh, wrong plot.

Mephistopheles reneges on the deal with Johnny Blaze. Johnny flees and becomes an Evel Knievel-like daredevil, but Mephistopheles comes to collect his debt. He orders Johnny to destroy his satanic son Blackheart and his evil minions, so that he rules supreme in the realm of evil.

At night Johnny turns into a Ghost Rider -- a flaming skeleton on a flaming motorcycle, and his war against evil gets rolling.

One wonders why in heaven's name Nic Cage would get involved in such a project as Ghost Rider. This is the man who won an Oscar in 1995 as best actor for Leaving Las Vegas. I guess the next step to Leaving Las Vegas is Entering Hell, vis-a-vis Ghost Rider.

The role of Johnny Blaze gives Nic Cage a chance to wear one of Frank Sinatra's old hairpieces and act out of his skull. In the buff he also has a Groucho Marx scene before a mirror. When Cage left Australia where Ghost Rider was shot he may have left his bag of leftover steroids for Sly Stallone.

Cage is a self-deprecating actor and he has a lot to be self-deprecating about in his performance as Johnny Blaze. But Cage seems oblivious to the clunky dialogue he is given. He delivers it like the Sermon on the Cycle.

Matt Long plays the young Johnny. Long's claim to fame is that previously his scenes were deleted from the movie Winter Solstice (2004). It's not hard to figure out why. He's vapid.

The other actors wage war with their roles. A good sidekick is a staple, but Donal Logue is nothing more than a dull sidekick. As Mephistopheles Peter Fonda -- without motorcycle -- is queasy rider. Eva Mendes is generic as the girlfriend Johnny leaves and meets again. She's no Lois Lane.

Sam Elliott as Caretaker is more flopsy than crusty. He knows he has bad dialogue so he mumbles it in hopes that no one will notice. He's a poor man's -- very poor man's -- Walter Brennan or Fuzzy St. John. Elliott acts like he'd never spit tobaccky before.

Wes Bentley as the villainous Blackheart looks like a scowling deer in the headlights.

But there's not much point in criticizing the supporting cast. It's like criticizing Anthony Warde, who played Killer Kane, in Buck Rogers.

The movie Ghost Rider is based on the Marvel comics character and was written and directed by Mark Steven Johnson. His previous credits include Daredevil and Elektra. I liked Daredevil more than most critics.

Most of Johnson's sequences are unimaginative. But Ghost Rider does have one great, arresting image of a fiery ghost rider on a motorcycle riding beside a fiery ghost rider on horseback. If only the movie had more such potent, poetic images.

The one misstep I can't forgive Johnson is having Spiderbait, a trio from Finley, Australia, render the credit sequence song Ghost Riders in the Sky. He could have chosen the deep, sonorous version by Vaughn Monroe. Or he could have used a version by Frankie Laine, who died February 6 at age 93, or Johnny Cash. Instead he went with a twerpy cover. That's unforgivable. That's Jezebel.

Overall Ghost Rider is too amiable to raise one's critical hackles much. It's a good-natured bad movie. Yippee-yi-ay! Yippee-yi-oh!
96 Who's it gonna be? Tony Macklin places his bets on the Oscars 2007-02-22 http://freeweekly.com/?p=139 1 17 4 153,154,116,90 1 0 What happens in Vegas stays in Vegas -- unless it's betting on the Oscars. Then you have to go abroad. Boy, do I wish I was in Curacao, Netherlands Antilles.

You can't bet on the Oscars in the United States, but Pinnacle Sports in Curacao has odds on all six major categories of the Academy Awards. Over the years I have done pretty well picking out a sure winner or two. But this year Pinnacle has stopped taking action from the U.S. because of a crackdown on gambling by the American government. More war, less gambling.

Two weeks before the ceremonies, looking over the odds from Pinnacle, one sees a lock, but it's too prohibitive to bet. If you wanted to wager on Helen Mirren to win Best Actress for her performance in The Queen, to win $100 you would have to bet $6,567.00. Now that's a lock. If you're going to an Oscar party, offer people the other four nominees in the Best Actress category at 10-1 or even 20-1, and hope some poor sucker thinks that's inviting. Mirren may be the most certain winning wager of all time.

If Helen Mirren is the all-time lock, Best Picture is surprisingly open. All five nominees are better than even money. Even the favorite The Departed pays $122 for a $100 wager (total payback $222). That's not bad. I'd take a play on that. I'd ignore the second choice Little Miss Sunshine at $100 to win $213 (total $313), even though it won Best Ensemble at the Screen Actors Guild Awards I think it has little chance. I'd put $100 on my favorite Babel at $100 to win $400 (total $500), and I might take a wild flyer on the longest shot The Queen at + $1,150. I'd bypass Letters from Iwo Jima (+$900), which I think is the most important film of the year, but Clint Eastwood has had his "make my year" Best Picture twice.

My personal lock of the year is director Marty Scorsese (The Departed) at -$456. Nobody wants to give almost 5-1, but Marty is a sure thing. It's a done deal. Free money. It's not only Marty's turn -- he's never won -- but he received the Directors Guild Award, which is a sterling harbinger of an Oscar to come.

In perhaps the most intriguing battle this year Forest Whitaker (-$612) is the heavy favorite over Peter O'Toole (+$506) for his brilliant performance in The Last King of Scotland against O'Toole's nostalgic turn in Venus. I might put a small flyer on OToole, but the line says that Whitaker will win. Like Scorsese, O'Toole has never won for his work on a film (he did receive an honorary Oscar), and he should join Richard Burton and  Cary Grant as foreign born actors who never won an Oscar, even though they were icons.

Here are the contenders:

BEST PICTURE

The Departed will win.

Although The Departed is not one of Scorsese's best films, it is more substantial than one might think. For cineastes I recommend Rene Rodriguez's article January 11 in the Miami Herald, about how Scorsese used X's "as symbols of impending doom." It's a revelation of Scorsese's deft use of the medium. Adapted from Hong Kong's Infernal Affairs, The Departed only garnered one acting nomination (Mark Wahlberg as Supporting Actor), but Scorsese's masterly direction could give it the big X.

My Favorite:   Babel (Babel -- rhymes with able -- not rabble) It is a complex, beautifully executed vision of the human condition.

Sleeper:   The Queen. I thought it had a slight chance, until I saw the odds.

BEST ACTOR

Forest Whitaker will win.

My Favorite:  Whitaker and O'Toole. I wish they could tie.

BEST ACTRESS

Helen Mirren will win.

My Favorite: Mirren.

BEST SUPPORTING ACTOR

Eddie Murphy will win for Dreamgirls.

My Favorite:  Mark Wahlberg.

Sleeper:  Alan Arkin. Don't count Arkin out. He has a real chance, and could be the upset of the Oscars.

BEST SUPPORTING ACTRESS

Jennifer Hudson will win for Dreamgirls.

Despite offscreen becoming a too-much-fame-too-fast diva, she's a deserving favorite.

My Favorite:  Cate Blanchett for Babel. The divine Cate.

Sleeper:  Abigail Breslin for Little Miss Sunshine. Since this award is often the awkward age award -- going to the very young or very old -- Little Miss B may have a shot.

Best Director:  Scorsese, Scorsese, Scorsese.

Now if I could only get a ride to Curacao. Where are Hope and Crosby? o96
97 Because I Said So 2007-02-15 http://freeweekly.com/?p=124 1 17 5 87 87 1 0 There are chick flicks and upchuck flicks. The movie Because I Said So is an upchuck chick flick.
In Because I Said So, Diane Keaton gives the worst performance of her storied career. She goes to the head of the line as contender for a Razzie as worst actress of the year.
Keaton won a Best Actress Oscar for Annie Hall (1977) and nominations for Reds (1981), Marvin's Room (1996), and Something's Gotta Give (2003), and gave other memorable performances, such as in The Godfather trilogy. Now she's a leading contender for a lousy performance award.
It's hard to imagine that there will be a more tone-deaf, self-parodying performance this year than the one Keaton gives as a neurotic, meddling, divorced mother of three adult girls. As Daphne Wilder, Keaton is like a female goat on speed.
It's one ugly performance.
She delivers her lines without a moment of thought. She's loud and inane. She weedles, squints her eyes, giggles, and flails wildly about. Annie Hall has become Annie Pratfall.
Granted much of the blame goes to the bad dialogue she's been given to baa. But she does her damndest to baa badly. Emphasis on dam.
Keaton should do an independent film to try to get her soul back. Her soul is in product placement.
Because I Said So is the lame story of a happy harridan -- mother of three daughters -- who is unhappily about to turn 60. So, of course, mom turns her attention to her youngest daughter Milly (Mandy Moore), who she thinks is unable to land a man.
Mom goes online and takes out a personal ad seeking a lifetime partner for her daughter, who has no idea what her mother is doing. Mother as pimp.
When you start with a dumb concept, dumber is the only way to go.
Answering the ad and meeting Mother Dumbest is an urbane architect (Tom Everett Scott), who pursues the unknowing Milly. Also in the equation is Johnny (Gabriel Macht), a pleasant guitarist with a young son.
Mom is for Jason and against the less successful, but artistic Johnny.
Can you guess what's going to happen?
Because I Said So has two writers, two editors, and half a director. Michael Lehmann started out his career directing the well-received Heathers (1989), but it's tailed off severely with a string of mediocrities. This time out Lehmann, et al. tank.
Scott and Macht smile a lot as the generic males, as does Stephen Collins, who plays Johnny's father, who has a thing for Mom. Emphasis on thing.
The men smile and the women whine.
Lauren Graham and Piper Perabo portray Milly's older sisters. Perabo spouts a few pretentious zingers, and Graham, as a psychologist, gives advice. We know she's a shrink because she has an office and one patient -- a dull character made terminally dull by Tony Hale's banal performance.
In an endless blather of witless lines, he's given the most witless.
The wretched script by Karen Leigh Hughes -- a bad actress turned bad writer -- and Jessie Nelson hits all the g spots (g for godawful).
There's cake in the face, a little boy who tells each woman he meets she has a 'gina, a man who talks about a booger in his nose, and a woman who snorts when she laughs. Great writing.
When all else fails, the "writers" have a conversation between mother and daughter about orgasm. The daughter does all the talking, since the mom doesn't know anything -- which of course has ruined her life.
Imagine Mandy Moore trying to describe an orgasm to Diane Keaton, and you realize the peaks of pleasure this film delivers.
Actually Mandy Moore survives the toxic performance by Keaton. But the film doesn't.
At the end of the film, it says, "No animal was harmed in the making of this film." I beg to differ.
Ask Coop, the dog who is directed to give endless reactions. In his big scene, he is forced to hump a cushion.
Coop is now in therapy. Easy for them to say no harm was done.
But Coop shouldn't feel too bad. He wasn't as terrible as Diane Keaton.
98 Catch and Release 2007-02-08 http://freeweekly.com/?p=118 1 17 5 88 88 1 0 Don't worry, Ben. Your marriage to Jennifer is still safe.
"Catch and Release," Jennifer Garner's latest film, will not cause Ben Affleck any husband-envy. It's a harmless romantic comedy that will garner Garner no awards and middling success at the box office. At my daytime, weekday attendance, I was the only person in the theater.
Unlike Chad Lowe (Mr. Hilary Swank) and John Stamos (Mr. Rebecca Romijn), Affleck has held his own. In fact, he's had a good year with his well-received performance in "Hollywoodland." So Ben and Jennifer are not threatened yet by career monsters.
"Catch and Release" is the kind of film I should hate. It certainly has its hate-worthy aspects. The first image of Gray Wheeler (Jennifer Garner) at the wake of her fiance, has her looking constipated. Her prune-like visage is accompanied by a sappy song.
This is an unpromising start. In fact, the whole wake sequence is labored and leaden. It features voice-over lines such as, "How could you leave me with your pervy uncle?"
The script also has lines such as: "You don't have two nickels to rub together." I guess in a dime-a-dozen movie, two nickels are acceptable.
Also potentially disastrous are Kevin Smith as a lovable slob -- he plays him with all the panache of an unmade bed -- and Sam Jaeger. I don't know what Jaeger's supposed to be. The dull housemate? If so, he achieves that. But one thing that keeps the movie from being really hateful is that Mark Ruffalo isn't in it. He'd make it into a kibble 'n bits movie.
In the role of the sensitive, hesitant suitor Fritz -- which Mark would have mangled and mushed -- we instead have Timothy Olyphant. He has the requisite bleached teeth, but he doesn't use them to whine. Thank goodness.
Olyphant, who stars in TV's "Deadwood," must have asked his agent for a role with no cursing. He's got it. A little cursing might help. Usually an actor tries to go from the soft to the hard as he expands his career. Olyphant goes from the harsh "Deadwood" to the pliant "Catch and Release."
Set in Colorado, "Catch and Release" is the story of a woman (Garner) whose fianc&#233; is killed in a fishing accident, which leaves her adrift. She moves into the house of two of his best chums. A third friend visits from Los Angeles to attend the funeral and the wake.
Garner slowly finds out that she didn't know her fianc&#233; as well as she thought she did, and she has to deal with each unraveling of his history as it is revealed to her.
Into the mix comes a vegan massage therapist (Juliette Lewis), who holds some of the answers. If this is beginning to sound trite, I guess it is.
The two saving graces are the scenery of Colorado and the fitfully engaging performances. Juliette Lewis is particularly lively as the vegan. There's also an incorrigibly cute boy who runs in and out of the film. Come to think of it, kibbles 'n bits might fit.
As much as one knows he should resist Garner's machinations, she still has those limpid eyes that pull you in. Despite an occasional nice moment with her costar Olyphant here, Jennifer Garner always has more chemistry with her audience than she ever has with any actor in her movies -- at least on screen.
The writer and director of "Catch and Release" is Susannah Grant. She received an Oscar nomination for the screenplay of "Erin Brockovich" and this is her directorial debut.
"Catch and Release" has little of the spunk of "Erin Brockovich." Fritz is reminiscent of the Aaron Eckhart boyfriend in "Erin Brockovich," but like the movie he has less spine.
Still, "Catch and Release" is a feel good movie.
For about ten minutes.
99 Pan's Labyrinth 2007-02-01 http://freeweekly.com/?p=106 1 17 5 89 89 1 0 Pan&#39;s Labyrinth is a punishing, evocative poem. It is part ferocious reality and part fearful fantasy.
Endangered children is a staple of television, but it&#39;s still somewhat of a rarity in major movies. But three successful movies in 2006 by Mexican directors have featured endangered children.
And all three films are political.
Those films are Pan&#39;s Labyrinth, written and directed by Guillermo del Toro, Babel, directed by Alexandro Gonzalez Inarritu and Children of Men, co-written and directed by Alfonso Cuaron.
The walls have not kept out Mexican directors &#45; the three Mexican filmmakers have received a total of 16 Oscar nominations.
In this year&#39;s nominations, Babel received seven nominations, including best picture. Children of Men received three nominations, and Pan&#39;s Labyrinth received six nominations.
Pan&#39;s Labyrinth is nominated for best original screenplay, art direction, cinematography, makeup, best original score and best foreign language film, which it should win.
Pan&#39;s Labyrinth is set in Spain in 1944, five years after the end of the Spanish Civil War. Franco&#39;s forces are in the process of wiping out the resistance guerillas.
Ofelia (Ivana Barquero), a young girl, is caught in this world of brutality, death, and horror. She tries to deal with it by moving into a world of fantasy.
Ofelia and her mother (Ariadna Gil), who is pregnant with the child of Captain Vidal (Sergei Lopez), travel to an ancient mill to the headquarters of Vidal, who is the vicious commander of the Franco forces charged with destroying the remaining partisans.
Although he is Ofelia&#39;s stepfather, Vidal only cares about the unborn child his wife is carrying, which he is convinced is a son who will carry on his lineage.
Vidal&#39;s headquarters is in a forest. In her wanderings Ofelia goes into the depths of a labyrinth in the gardens &#45; symbolism, metaphor and imagination soar.
Ofelia meets a horned faun (Doug Wilson) who gives her three dangerous tasks and tells her that if she accomplishes them, she will be restored to the status of princess that she once possessed in a previous realm.
She is trying to prevail in two different worlds. Both have dangers, and both have monsters. She can&#39;t change reality, but perhaps she can change fantasy.
Her fantasy is not mere escapism. In a world in which faith often leads to ignorance, can her fantasy lead to redemption?
Guillermo del Toro is showing that children are victimized in war. It&#39;s a theme that in present day is hidden among the unseen caskets.
Decades ago when I first contributed to Sight and Sound&#39;s list of best films of all-time, I included Rene Clement&#39;s French film Forbidden Games (1952). It is about two children who are refugees in World War II.
It is a haunting vision of children struggling to survive in a world they don&#39;t understand. Pan&#39;s Labyrinth has the same haunting vision. But this time the child does understand.
The cast is excellent. Young Ivana Barquero is affecting as Ofelia, who is both vulnerable and bold. Sergei Lopez is compelling as the chilly, remorseless fascist commander Vidal.  And Maribel Verdu provides much-needed humanity as an empathetic housekeeper.
The fact that Pan&#39;s Labyrinth received nominations in technical categories shows how artful it is.
And the nominations show that a new Hollywood may be emerging. Many have commented on the diversity of those who have been rewarded with nominations.
In Pan&#39;s Labyrinth, fantasy tries to trump fear, but new fears compete with the old ones. Can fantasy provide a means for prevailing over moral chaos?
Can fantasy save us?
Moviegoes who leave the theater may need to conjure up a new fantasy to escape del Toro&#39;s.
Or at least take a stiff drink.
100 Letters from Iwo Jima 2007-01-25 http://freeweekly.com/?p=95 1 17 5 90 90,46,156,221,252 1 0 Letters from Iwo Jima Destined to Become a Classic

The most important film of 2006 was Clint Eastwood's "Letters from Iwo Jima."

The year 2006 will enable director Marty Scorsese to win his first Oscar (for directing "The Departed"). And in 2006 Robert Altman died, after releasing his final film "Prairie Home Companion." But "Letters from Iwo Jima" will outlast all movies released last year in its impact and significance.

In 20 years "Letters from Iwo Jima" will be a classic.

It is remarkable what sustained impact Clint Eastwood has had on cinema for the last 15 years. If by 1992 Eastwood had stopped participating in movies his career would have been special. But from "Unforgiven" (1992) to the present, he has raised it several notches.

Clint Eastwood has not been staying the course. He's too gifted for that. Clint has been an artful chameleon. In "Dirty Harry" (1971) he embodied a character that is in the pantheon of movie anti-heroes. But he was multi-dimensional as an actor in "In the Line of Fire" (1993).

Eastwood has taken more chances than are generally noted. Some he survived -- "The Bridges of Madison County" (1995). Some he didn't -- "Paint Your Wagon" (1969). Some are almost unknown -- "The Beguiled" (1970).

In 1971 Eastwood -- with the help of veteran Don Siegel--directed his first film "Play Misty for Me."  In 1971 could anyone have imagined that 35 years later Clint Eastwood would have directed a film in Japanese (with English subtitles), from the Japanese point of view, written by a young Japanese woman?

Although often appearing stoic, in his career Eastwood has been a live wire. He buried the western genre in the brutal, elegiac "Unforgiven." The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture, and Eastwood won an Oscar for his direction. That should have been the capstone for his remarkable career.
It looked as though then he was just going to make geriatric entertainments, such as "Space Cowboys" (2000).

But Eastwood subsequently accomplished another feat. He directed a movie that was nominated as Best Picture: "Mystic River" (2003). Neither the film nor Eastwood won the award--"Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King" and Peter Jackson did -- but two actors, Sean Penn and Tim Robbins won Oscars for their roles in "Mystic River."

Even more striking was that in 2004 Eastwood won Best Picture with "Million Dollar Baby." This time he did garner the Oscar as Best Director.

And he had to fight the system to even get "Million Dollar Baby" made. His home studio Warner Bros rejected the idea. You don't reject Clint. He went to a smaller studio, Lakeshore Entertainment, and after they agreed to make "Million Dollar Baby," Warner Bros skulked aboard.

But Eastwood still had something important to say. He had the idea to tell about the invasion of Iwo Jima from both sides, the American point of view and the Japanese point of view.

At the time of preemptive jingoism, people assumed Clint would be a warrior. He would show those who weren't Americans. He would unfurl the flag with pride and ego. But he didn't meet those Foxy preconceptions. Instead he wanted to be true to the human condition wherever it was set.

The first film "Flags of Our Fathers" didn't meet expectations at the box office. Clint wasn't heralding "the greatest generation." His focus was on the selling of heroism, patriotism, war itself. It is a compelling vision, but not a commercial one.

"Flags of Our Fathers" is an admirable movie. "Letters from Iwo Jima" is more. At a time when enemies -- distant and domestic -- are dehumanized, Eastwood has humanized an enemy.

The script by Iris Yamashita of "Letters from Iwo Jima" is based on letters that were found on Iwo Jima that were written by Lt. General Tadamichi Kuibayashi, who was given charge of defending the island of Iwo Jima against the invasion.

Ken Watanabe gives a towering performance of fierce dignity as the besieged officer. The movie also focuses on a young baker (Kazunari Ninomiya) who wants to return to his wife and daughter but fears he won't.

"Letters from Iwo Jima" is both odd and obvious -- a fairly generic portrait of soldiers at war. There even is a scene back at home of a little dog in trouble.

But what makes the movie different is that the soldiers -- brave, callow, committed and very young -- could be from almost any country.

Iwo Jima is a neglected subject in Japan. Eastwood opens up the history and the discussion. He's a moviemaker, but he's also a historian and artist. He is not interested in the sweep of propaganda; he is interested in the sweep of history and humanity.

For a Hollywood figure with star power to declare himself a citizen of the world goes against the contemporary grain (or oil). Eastwood didn't take political polls. He went where his heart -- and especially his mind -- took him.

It's a good place.
491 Cosmopolis 2012-09-02 12 17 5 883 883,34,462,884,885 1 0 It&#39;s rare to have a good movie made from a novel by an artistic American author. Extremely rare.
For every successful No Country for Old Men (2007), there are legions of duds, e.g., Updike&#39;s Rabbit, Run (1970), Mailer&#39;s The Naked and the Dead (1958), Hemingway&#39;s The Sun Also Rises (1957), ad nauseum. Rabbit, Run isn&#39;t even on DVD.
Most artistic American fiction isn&#39;t made into movies. Language doesn&#39;t seem to translate into image. Plot and character must be twisted to be more commercial.
Now Canadian director David Cronenberg takes a wayward shot at making a film out of Don DeLillo&#39;s artful novel Cosmopolis. Cronenberg&#39;s version drones and flounders.
Cosmopolis is the story of Eric Packer (Robert Pattinson), a financial wizard, who takes an immense, white stretch limousine across Manhattan with the goal of getting a haircut from a family acquaintance in Hell&#39;s Kitchen.
While on his trek he is investing all his money, leveraging the Chinese Yuan (in the book it is the Japanese yen, but what&#39;s the difference? They all look alike.) He&#39;s risking it all.
In his limo Eric is visited by several employees. His trip is slowed and stalled by the visiting president&#39;s motorcade and the funeral procession for a rapper.
A few times he exits the car to meet his wife Elise (Sarah Gadon) or commit unexpected actions.
But unlike the book, he never opens the sunroof. Cronenberg&#39;s film is basically enclosed.
One of the film&#39;s major flaws is the casting of Robert Pattinson as Eric. One can imagine that the film would never have gotten made without the popular young heartthrob, but he is miscast.
Pattinson can be a capable actor, but he doesn&#39;t have the gravitas to play Eric Packer. He mopes and just languidly goes through the motions.
DeLillo&#39;s Eric is not shallow on the page, but in the movie he is a near-cipher. The closest Pattinson comes to the page is the several times he nearly turns into cardboard.
Much of the film takes place in a stretch limo. It stretches more than the actor does. Pattinson is no young Jeremy Irons.
In the book Eric is knowledgeable &#45; he knows the Latin name of the honey locust tree. He makes references to Freud and Einstein. He seems intelligent and aware. He has depth.
Cronenberg&#39;s Eric is venal and static. This is lowlighted by the limitations of the actor.
Cronenberg must figure that since Pattinson&#39;s Eric is a near-cipher, he must pair him with an actress who is a near-cipher. Sarah Gadon fits the void as Eric&#39;s wealthy wife Elise.
There are two other actors who do retain personality in the vacuum. Juliette Binoche is feisty and fine as Eric&#39;s art dealer, and Kevin Durand is human and convincing as Eric&#39;s head of security. He has a strong presence.
At times it seems as though some of the dialogue is dubbed by Christopher Walken. Both Durand and Pattinson speak lines that have a rasp similar to Walken, but an occasional rasp is just a blip.
It is disheartening to see how many reviewers analyze Cosmopolis without any reference to DeLillo. The screenplay was written by director Cronenberg, based on the novel published in 2003.
DeLillo is a master of language &#45; his prose sings. He is an eloquent stylist, insightful and incisive. Cronenberg&#39;s translation seems clunky. The dialogue in the film often is presented in a stilted and pretentious way. DeLillo&#39;s vision is blunted.
The challenge is to attain a visual equivalent for words. How do you visualize DeLillo&#39;s words describing the tall building in which Eric lives?
DeLillo writes, &#34;It had the kind of banality that reveals itself as being truly brutal.&#34; How do you show that? Cronenberg doesn&#39;t even try.
Or how do you show, &#34;A man from the century past played a saxophone on the corner&#34;? You don&#39;t.
Some changes lose their point. DeLillo&#39;s Eric says in the car, &#34;Nothing swivels but the spycam.&#34; Cronenberg changes it to the meaningless, &#34;... but your seat.&#34; A seat replaces a spycam.
Cronenberg cuts one of the crucial major scenes, which is the last time Eric sees Elise amidst 300 naked bodies lying on the street at night. They&#39;re in a film being shot on the street. It probably was too costly for Cronenberg to shoot. It&#39;s a costly loss.
And Cronenberg ends the movie 5 1/2 pages before DeLillo&#39;s ending. It would be nearly impossible to film the philosophical observations in the final pages. Who needs them?
One personal caveat: I&#39;m a fan of Don DeLillo. DeLillo once commented positively that a story I had written was &#34;operatic.&#34;
I taught DeLillo&#39;s novels White Noise and also Underworld. [Maybe Paul Thomas Anderson should consider Underworld as a future project.]
Can you imagine that two novels in one of my courses were Norman Mailer&#39;s Harlot&#39;s Ghost (1,168 pages) and DeLillo&#39;s masterpiece Underworld (827 pages)? No one survived.
Cronenberg does make a few canny decisions with cinematic effects. Since a major theme in the book Cosmopolis is balance and &#34;the importance of the lopsided,&#34; the director utilizes half faces. He has an abundance of profile shots, and often one side of the face is in shadow or marked by the remnants of pie filling (which is thrown at Eric) or a scar. Witness the right side of Eric&#39;s head after his haircut.
Cronenberg also uses light and the shock of its glare. &#34;Let them see each other clean, in killing light,&#34; DeLillo wrote.
But profiles and light aren&#39;t enough.
There&#39;s an energy and personality missing from the film. The novel seems very intelligent; the movie doesn&#39;t.
Cronenberg muddles Eric&#39;s trip.
In Cosmopolis, he throws DeLillo under the limo.
492 Robot &amp; Frank 2012-09-08 12 17 5 886 886,887 1 0 Robot &amp; Frank is an airy, engaging flight of fancy.
It&#39;s also part caper film, part character study, and part allegory about aging.Robot &amp; Frank shouldn&#39;t work, but it does. It has the potential to be clanky and clunky, but instead it&#39;s ebullient and smooth. Like the clever robot, it&#39;s a fine piece of work.
Robot &amp; Frank is the story of Frank Weld (Frank Langella), a retired thief &#45; &#34;a second story man&#34; &#45; who is facing dementia. He lives alone in his house in upstate rural New York.
Frank has severe lapses of memory. He thinks his son Hunter (James Marsden) still is at Princeton, and that his long closed local eatery still is open.
His days are a tired ritual of walking to town, going into a shop where he pilfers soap figures, and visiting an old library, which like him has become dated and faces a new world of technology in which paper books are being transformed electronically.
Hunter, who has to make five hour drives to visit and worries about his dad&#39;s deterioration, gives Frank a robot healthcare-aide. The robot has no empathy chip. but is smart and proficient &#45; he is a whiz at cooking and cleaning.
With dispatch he cleans up Frank&#39;s dusty, messy house. And he gardens.
At first Frank holds his helper in disdain, but the robot&#39;s unflappable attitude eventually gets to Frank, and they begin to compromise. Frank eats fruit and vegetables from the robot&#39;s garden instead of his usual Cap&#39;n Crunch.
Frank also has an effect on the robot. The robot has rules, but they are hardly absolute. Ultimately, Frank and the robot become friends.
They become partners in crime, together committing robberies. One robbery is stealing the most valuable book in the library &#45; a beautiful, old edition of Don Quixote. 
The authorities close in on the pair, and Frank and the robot have to make a decision about what comes next.
What makes Robot &amp; Frank work best is the wonderful performance by Frank Langella. Even though the bots in his brain are broken, Frank is a thinking man. We witness his struggles etched on his changing expressions.
Time has damaged Frank, but the robot refreshes his spirit and reboots his brain. Because Langella convinces us that Frank believes in the robot, we do too.
Inside the gleaming exterior of the robot &#45; a white spaceman &#45; is dancer Rachael Ma, who gives grace to its body. When Langella, who is circa 6&#39; 3,&#39;&#39; stands beside the robot (the 4&#39; 11&#39;&#39; adult Ma) they make a decidedly odd couple.
The voice of the robot was added after shooting. Peter Sarsgaard replaced Liev Shreiber as voice and reportedly did the dialogue in eight hours.
James Marsden is effective as the dutiful, worried son, but director Jake Schreier and writer Christopher Ford don&#39;t prepare his character for the ending. He is an unknown quantity in the crucial finale.
Liv Tyler has an awkward role as Frank&#39;s daughter Madison, well-meaning but naive. Madison is a globe-trotting activist &#45; adamantly against robot labor &#45;who comes home to try to care for her addled father.
Director Schreier, who has set the film in the near future, adds a nice touch in that she drives a worn, dented Prius.
Susan Sarandon portrays the librarian who is undergoing very symbolic change in the library.
In a movie in which most of the roles are nicely modulated, one is jarringly overplayed. Jeremy Strong seems distinctly out of place as the creepy consultant who is shoving the library into the future.
Schreier may want Strong to jar, but he is annoying &#45; not only as a character, but as an actor. He effects a drastically different tone than the rest of the movie. Is the future going to be that obnoxious?
There are a few glaring omissions &#45; e.g., why didn&#39;t the law follow up on Frank&#39;s glasses? Schreier hasn&#39;t earned the tolerance we give Hitchcock.
It&#39;s clear that Schreier and Ford didn&#39;t want to personalize the robot with a name. But I thought of him as Sancho Panza.
The ending of Robot and Frank may not be disappointing; it&#39;s just not as crowd-pleasing as it could be. It&#39;s more rote than fulfilling. The audience may expect and yearn for a little more sentiment between friends.
Still, overall, Robot &amp; Frank is a pleasure. It may remind one of Harvey (1950), but this time the friend is visible.
In its own way, Robot &amp; Frank is pixillating.
493 Arbitrage 2012-09-16 12 17 5 888 888 1 0 Arbitrage is the latest in a long line of movies with touches of Alfred Hitchcock&#39;s DNA.
Nicholas Jarecki, the 33-year old writer/director of Arbitrage, is a graduate of the New York University Film School, so he knows his film history.
Arbitrage is about a man figuratively and literally on the run. We may root for Robert Miller (Richard Gere) even though he&#39;s guilty of crimes. Like Hitch, Jarecki uses his protagonist to manipulate his audience.
The film reverberates with themes such as deception, ethical ambiguity, and the impact of fate.
Robert&#39;s crimes are on two levels. One is professional; the other is personal. As a &#34;billionaire&#34; he has committed fraud, and he has borrowed money to cover his fraud. He is trying to sell his company to raise money to fix things before he is caught.
Robert&#39;s other crime is that he leaves the scene of an accident and tries to avoid incrimination, as a police detective (Tim Roth) doggedly pursues him.
Jarecki wavers a bit, and Arbitrage could be edgier, but Richard Gere gives a strong performance as the troubled businessman. He looks great with his wavy, silverish hair. He is a mixture of casual aplomb and anxious vulnerability.
Susan Sarandon portrays Robert&#39;s wife, and her role becomes crucial at the end. The only blonde (Hitch might balk) is Robert&#39;s daughter (Brit Marling), who is chief investment officer of her father&#39;s company.
Roth is an apt adversary as the gung-ho cop who wants to finally topple a Wall Street mogul.
Nate Parker is a little too soft and nice as the son of Robert&#39;s late driver. He tries to aid Robert and is thrown into an ethical dilemma that doesn&#39;t quite work. The character is perhaps too passive.
Jarecki raises themes that might appeal to Hitchcock. In Arbitrage, accident and unexpected circumstances shatter well-being.
Negotiation matters. Is there anyone you can trust? Money rules.
Hitch&#39;s DNA is still strong. Arbitrage provides potent evidence.
494 Trouble with the Curve 2012-09-24 12 17 5 889 889,46,170 1 0 Trouble with the Curve should be titled Trouble with the Cliche.
It was not written by a hitter; it was written by a hacker.
It&#39;s depressing to think that Clint Eastwood&#39;s final screen appearance may be in this junkball movie.
Clint is known for delivering memorable lines of dialogue, but there isn&#39;t a single worthy line for Clint to spit out. The dialogue is flaccid. &#34;Make my day&#34; is now &#34;Make my urination.&#34;
Maybe that&#39;s why he spends most of the movie with a hemorrhoidal scowl.
Throughout his fabled career Clint&#39;s persona has been graced by credibility and authenticity, but this time out he seems graceless and second-rate.
He is gaunt &#45; almost haggard &#45; as he wanders through a thin performance.
I thought Clint gave a memorable performance in Million Dollar Baby (2004) that would stand impressively if it were his last. At the end Clint walked down a hall in a hospital and out a door. This was followed by a shot of a rural diner where his character probably wound up. It was evocative.
Then Clint decided to appear on the screen again. He gave a performance in Gran Torino (2008) that was probably an even better swan song. His character Walt Kowalski was genuine Clint. It was credible and authentic. It would have stood as a perfect finale to his acting career.
For some reason Clint decided to trump both previous performances with a return to the screen in Trouble with the Curve. Maybe the character of Gus Lobel appealed to him, but it&#39;s difficult to imagine the writing did.
Clint has told a lot of people &#45; including me &#45; that fans always ask him about Dirty Harry making a return. He scoffs at the idea.
Instead of Dirty Harry, in Trouble with the Curve, he&#39;s Gloomy Gus. Give me ancient Harry. He at least might have flair.
Trouble with the Curve is the story of Gus Lobel (Eastwood), an aged scout for the Atlanta Braves, who drafted the likes of Chipper Jones, et al.
Gus is coming to the end of his contract and is facing the possibility of forced retirement. He is Old School and the young guns, dependent on the Internet for analysis, are trying to oust him.
Gus is losing his sight and is terminally grouchy. His friend and boss (John Goodman) contacts Gus&#39;s lawyer daughter Mickey (Amy Adams) and informs her of her father&#39;s condition.
She joins her dad in North Carolina, where he is scouting a high school slugger, who is very much a clod.
Mickey yearns to relate to her estranged father, who after her mother&#39;s death deserted her as a young child. She has lived her life trying to prove herself.
In North Carolina a scout for the Red Sox appears &#45; Johnny Flanagan (Justin Timberlake). He was a pitcher who had been discovered by Gus, and then had an injury which ended his career. Now he&#39;s a scout with plans to become a broadcaster.
They make an odd trio.
It all ends in totally contrived hokum. The Clint we knew and loved would have rasped, &#34;What is this crap?&#34;
There was resolute humanity in Clint&#39;s fine performance as Walt Kowalski, but Clint&#39;s Gus is mostly just cranky. Clint gives an occasional Clint-smile, but otherwise he&#39;s forgettable. It&#39;s disheartening to see Clint being drab and sour.
Amy Adams and Justin Timberlake have a few engaging moments when they flirt, but mostly they&#39;re around to prop up Clint.
Clint&#39;s son Scott plays Billy Clark, a slumping player who needs his mommy and daddy.
Matthew Lillard is vacuous in a thanklessly rigged role as a would-be executive on the rise for the Atlanta Braves.
The most contrived role in a movie of contrived roles is Bo Gentry (Joe Massingill). He puts the slug in slugger in a dull caricature. He&#39;s an odious, one-dimensional figure. If he&#39;s going to be cartoonish, Massingill would be more comfortable playing Bluto in Popeye.
Director Robert Lorenz, Clint&#39;s longtime producer, does the icon no favors as first-time director. With another first-timer &#45; screenwriter Randy Brown &#45; he creates a sophomoric mess.
Lorenz and Brown are amateurish D-leaguers.
Brown puts phony lines in Clint&#39;s mouth. Gus says, &#34;Did you hear Jurrjens pitched a no-no?&#34; [No no-hitter.] Yeah, a veteran scout would say &#34;no-no.&#34;
When Johnny stops on the roadside to watch boys play baseball, a young boy who is batting left-handed is pretending to be A-Rod. Yeah, a left-handed boy would pick a right-handed batting star to emulate.
The crowd scenes are embarrassingly directed by Lorenz.
I never thought I&#39;d miss Clint&#39;s tinkling piano music, but Lorenz replaces it with mediocre strings. Late in the movie there&#39;s a little piano, but it&#39;s not Clint&#39;s sound.
Clint Eastwood has always had strong will, creativity, and integrity. But this time they&#39;re not evident.
Trouble with the Curve is Clint Eastwood&#39;s most trite movie.
It&#39;s a no-no.
495 Looper 2012-09-25 12 17 5 890 890,224,454,82,394 1 0 Looper is stylish mayhem.
It careens along the edge of silliness. It stalls and starts and spins out. It&#39;s a spastic attack on its audience&#39;s suspension of disbelief.
Who knew the future could contain so much hokum?
The cast fights mightily to try to keep the movie from blowing apart. Piper Perabo even takes off her top. Maybe she should stick to acting.
Looper is set in Kansas in 2044 and other places at other times. It doesn&#39;t much matter where we are or where it is.
Joe (Joseph Gordon-Levitt), the loopy looper, has to time travel into another time to kill himself (Bruce Willis) so that he doesn&#39;t make bad movies. No, that&#39;s not it. So he can avoid Demi Moore. No. Oh, forget it.
Loopers are sent by the &#34;mob&#34; to assassinate criminals who might incriminate them in the future. They do their killing with blunderbusses. The film pays homage to blunderbusses in that it too is a blunderbuss. No accuracy from afar.
Old Joe (Willis) has to shoot a child to prevent him from growing into The Rainmaker, which seems an overly harsh reaction to Dustin Hoffman. But have no fear &#45; or sense &#45; young Joe goes there to try to save a woman (Emily Blunt) and her bad seed son (Pierce Gagnon).
Looper asks the question, can a mother&#39;s love save a ridiculous movie? No, that&#39;s not it. Can a bad seed be turned into a sweet Fruit Loop?
No wonder the kid is screwed up. He thinks his mother is her sister.... Where&#39;s Jack Nicholson when we need him? He&#39;d smack some sense back into the movie.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt dashes about willy-nilly firing at anything that moves. He takes drugs in eye drops, which may be the reason he put on contacts and so much make-up.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt is one of my favorite actors. When I saw his brilliant performance in Mysterious Skin (2004), I predicted that some day he&#39;d win an Oscar. His strength is a compelling sensitivity &#45; I don&#39;t mean the kind of sentimentality he exhibited in (500) Days of Summer (2009).
But he seems to like to appear in movies in which gravity doesn&#39;t much matter. Recently he seems drawn to motion and flash &#45; not the best background in which to evolve as an actor.
Bruce Willis is Joe grown-up, and like younger Joe he blasts everything in sight. The chemistry between Bruce Willis and Joseph Gordon-Levitt is awkward. Where&#39;s Mos Def when we need him?
In Looper, Joseph Gordon-Levitt appears in a movie with an actor with whom he once had great chemistry. Jeff Daniels, who plays the honcho of the loopers, appeared with Gordon-Levitt in The Lookout (2007). The Lookout is a much better movie than Looper. But the latter will make a lot more money.
Emily Blunt portrays Sara, the woman with a son, whom Joe tries to save from himself. Blunt is not comfortable cursing. She&#39;s lousy at swearing. And this movie needs credible swearing.
Wizardly writer/director Rian Johnson creates a vivid visual experience. But it&#39;s more flash than sense. Don&#39;t pull back that curtain. I imagine when he pitched the plot to the producers, he put them in a trance.
It&#39;s corpses and splatter, oh my.
Johnson puts the warp in time warp. The plot is clever, but it lurches. Flashbacks and flash-forwards are fine as long as they cohere, but when the characters seem baffled, they may not be at their optimum.
And Johnson keeps one character Kid Blue around so that every time his film slows a bit, he can kill him off again. Noah Segan plays Kid Blue. Johnson directed Segan previously in Brick (2005). This reprise shows that loyalty may be overrated.
Johnson might have been better off to kill Kid Blue once and be done with him. He&#39;s pretty dull.
The &#34;surprise&#34; climax of Looper occurs near a cornfield in Kansas.
The Scarecrow loves this movie. He&#39;s still looking for a brain.
496 The Master 2012-09-26 12 17 5 891 891,892,344 1 0 Writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson&#39;s The Master baits the audience.
One notable reviewer, in a major magazine, ended his rave: &#34;He [Anderson] clarifies nothing, but leaves us brooding on our own confusion.&#34;
WTF?
Some of us prefer more clarity and less pretension. I&#39;m brooding, but I don&#39;t think I&#39;m confused.
One may admire The Master for its scope, style, and maybe some of the acting, but its vision is myopic.
Let&#39;s zoom in on the lint in PTA&#39;s navel.
The Master is about a battle of wills in a squared circle. It&#39;s in the neighborhood of L. Ron Hubbard and Scientology.
In one corner we have Lancaster Dodd (Philip Seymour Hoffman), the leader of a controversial spiritual movement. He is a smooth-talking, hooch-drinking figure of authority. He leads with ego, guile, and personality.
In the other corner we have Freddie Quell (Joaquin Phoenix), an alcoholic vagrant, who was psychologically-wounded in the Second World War and by an institutionalized mother, and who knows what other terrors.
It&#39;s like a battle between Foghorn Leghorn and Daffy Duck.
Freddie stows away on a yacht where he meets Dodd and comes under his guidance. Dodd manipulates a willing Freddie, but there are flaws in the manipulation, and Freddie is not always compliant.
As the movement &#45; &#34;The Cause&#34; &#45; grows larger and comes under greater attack, Freddie becomes Dodd&#39;s physical muscle.
The battle for identity continues.
What the two leading characters don&#39;t seem to realize is the influence and power of women.
On the yacht Peggy (Amy Adams) awakens Freddie. Doris (Madisen Beaty), his hometown infatuation, becomes his lifelong delusion. Women lay hands on men. Peggy controls and instructs her vulnerable husband Lancaster.
Freddie lies next to a woman made of sand on a wartime beach. And in a climactic scene, Freddie gives orders to a woman (Jennifer Neale Page) as she is atop him. The woman-on-top&#39;s name is Winn. Are you kidding, PTA?
The acting in The Master has received fulsome praise. Philip Seymour Hoffman is remarkable as the leader of the band. In the only subtle performance in the film, Amy Adams exhibits a provocative strength as the frank wife.
Laura Dern is convincing as a follower who questions the changes in Dodd&#39;s philosophy. In a clever piece of casting, Patty McCormack portrays another follower of the movement. Now 67 years old, McCormack as a child came to fame in The Bad Seed (1956).
The actor who most emphasizes the pretension in The Master is Joaquin Phoenix. Affecting a pose like an addled, awkward Buster Keaton, Phoenix gives a &#34;look at me, Ma, I&#39;m acting&#34; performance.
Spontaneously Phoenix farts. Then he guffaws. Now that&#39;s some pungent acting.
Does one care about Freddie&#39;s odyssey from naive clod to experienced clod? A &#34;free&#34; clod is still a clod.
Directors often are effectively self-indulgent. Robert Altman &#45; PTA&#39;s mentor &#45; certainly was, but he rarely was pretentious. Even when he was &#45; as with an underrated film like Images (1972) &#45; it was enticing.
Can one say the same about PTA?
Paul Thomas Anderson may have more in common with Lancaster Dodd than we recognize. His trip to enlightenment depends on his followers &#45; no matter how confused they may be.
It seems the left hand doesn&#39;t know what the right hand is doing.
497 End of Watch 2012-09-29 12 17 5 893 893 1 0 If you leave before the end of End of Watch &#45; about 3/4 of the way through &#45; you&#39;ll see a much better movie.
For much of its length, End of Watch is one of the stronger movies of the year. It&#39;s a taut, human drama that stresses character and intimacy.
Then it goes awry. It brings back a Latino gang that has a one-word-obscenity vocabulary and can&#39;t shoot straight. They blow up the screenplay and everything else in sight.
One of the big questions is &#45; why did writer/director David Ayer lose his nerve? He had everything going for him, and then he turned a very human film into a cartoon.
I half expected Wile E. Coyote to show up and have his head blown off. I think I did see a kitchen sink spouting an f-bomb fly by.
Up until the climax and the anti-climax and the anti-anti-climax, Ayer had created a unique movie experience. Using the concept of one of the cops making a movie, Ayer captured a convincing sense of immediacy and reality.
The camera work &#45; ably done by Roman Vasyanov &#45; jerks, bumps, and grinds as it connects us with the experiences of the cops in South Central L.A. The camera even turns us upside down.
What grounds End of Watch is the relationships of the characters, especially Officer Brian Taylor (Jake Gyllenhaal) and Officer Miguel Zavala (Michael Pena) &#45; &#34;Z&#34; to his partner.
Despite their harrowing environment, they smile a lot. They are a happy-go-lucky pair. They kid, banter, and discuss their different lives. But they share the value of being good cops who stand up against evil.
There still are angels in Los Angeles.
In the havoc around them, the two cops excel. The film has several tense and emotional scenes. One of the memorable scenes is when the two &#34;heroes&#34; try to save small children in a fiery house.
There&#39;s also a compelling scene when Z fights a criminal because he called him out. It has an unexpected outcome &#45; both for us and the brawler.
Many of the scenes have a freshness.
Both the cops have positive relationships with women. Taylor falls in love with Janet (Anna Kendrick), and Z is married to a woman he can&#39;t live without (Natalie Martinez). The women add to the humanity of the story. The two men talk &#45; often amusingly &#45; about relationships.
End of Watch avoids many of the conventions of other cop movies and goes its own way. But then it veers back to the easy, most conventional of modes.
End of Watch is a moral tale that unfortunately misplaces its truth. That&#39;s a hell of an end.
498 Critical Perspectives with Tony Macklin 2012-10-07 http://www.blogtalkradio.com/moviegeeksunited/2012/10/06/the-films-of-alfred-hitchcock 30 23 7 342,341,248,894,299,888,123 1 0 The Movie Geeks speak with film critic Tony Macklin regarding the works of legendary director Alfred Hitchcock.

 Movie Geeks United! is the most popular movie-themed podcast on the internet and iTunes, 
featuring informative and passionate discussions on new and classic films, 
and interviews with more than 600 of the brightest talents in the business, 
including James Cameron, Francis Ford Coppola, Robert Duvall, 
Brian De Palma, Paul Schrader, and John Sayles.  Listen to internet radio with MOVIE GEEKS UNITED on Blog Talk Radio m498
499 Argo 2012-10-13 12 17 5 895 895 1 0 Argo is a skillful, dramatic entertainment. It&#39;s slick.
Argo will be very popular. Why wouldn&#39;t it be? It hits all the right harmonious notes, without any dissonance, It&#39;s Ben Affleck channeling Hallmark. Greetings from Iran.
Argo is an antiseptic thriller &#45; fast, furious, and facile. It skates on the shiny surface of reality.
In its rush to be &#34;feel-good,&#34; Argo sacrifices a lot &#45; such as depth and credibility. It has thrills and laughs; it just doesn&#39;t have much substance.
Based loosely &#45; extremely loosely &#45; by screenwriter Chris Terrio on actual events, Argo is the compelling story of the attempt to rescue six Americans who escaped from a mob that stormed the U.S. Embassy and took hostages in Tehran on November 4, 1979.
The six hid in the domicile of the Canadian Ambassador Ken Taylor (Victor Garber). The Iranians don&#39;t know they are there, but if they&#39;re found out they face execution. It&#39;s a situation fraught with dread.
Tony Mendez (Ben Affleck) &#45; an exfiltration expert &#45; comes up with the idea that the only feasible way to rescue the Americans is to pretend to be a Canadian film group scouting Iran for a sci-fi film they&#39;re going to make, which will enable them to go to Iran and extricate the six &#34;houseguests.&#34;
But the fake movie has to be believable, so Tony goes to Hollywood and enlists a makeup man (John Goodman) and a producer (Alan Arkin) to develop and publicize the phantom movie.
The government hesitantly supports the make-shift plan. It&#39;s put into action by Tony who travels to Iran to try to execute it in the face of lethal danger. Each step is risky.
As in The Town, director Affleck at times is given to overwrought effects, but he keeps the action flowing.
The camera work by Rodrigo Prieto is effective. Affleck likes to use shots of objects &#45; phones, a yellow ribbon, an eye, a teargas cannister, a pile of folders, and a tangle of paper shreds.
Affleck and Prieto have good visual sense, such as a distant shot of Tony standing alone on a balcony with a wall of glass windows isolating him.
Argo tries to gain some authenticity by using television clips of newsmen: Ted Koppel, David Frost, Mike Wallace, Tom Brokaw, and even Walter Cronkite, et al. But clips are just clips. Authenticity demands more. 
The script by Terrio has some amusing, gentle satire of Hollywood. But in the action and suspense scenes, it gives in to contrivance.
Everything works out &#45; I mean, everything. And most of it happens in the very last second possible. &#34;Whew&#34; we go again and again. Luck gets no respite; it&#39;s incredibly overworked.
Terrio creates partial characters &#45; the six escapees are a bland bunch. But they&#39;re also obvious and contrived. The most cowardly of the group stands up and is heroic. Another character whose loyalty is questioned turns out to be a paragon of loyalty. But don&#39;t worry, that character winds up ok. There&#39;s hardly a scratch on anybody.
Argo&#39;s ending is tied up in a neat, conventional bow. The final words about our hero that appear on the screen are, &#34;He lives in rural Maryland with his family.&#34; That&#39;s it?
The acting is strong when the actors are given anything of value to do. Ben Affleck makes an earnest, stalwart protagonist. John Goodman and Alan Arkin enliven proceedings as the Hollywood duo. And Vincent Garber is a nice man as the Canadian Ambassador.
Argo does what it sets out to do. It thrills and doesn&#39;t provoke.
In Hollywood &#45; both today and yesterday &#45; that&#39;s entertainment.
500 Shifty 2012-10-18 12 17 5 896 896 1 0 Shifty is low-key, low budget, but high grade. It&#39;s a film about sitting and talking. And drug dealing.
It builds slowly &#45; some may want more action, but it has a surprisingly satisfying conclusion.
Shifty is the story of Shifty (Riz Ahmed) and his best mate Chris (Daniel Mays) and their crucial reunion.
Shifty is set in a community on the outskirts of London. Chris visits from Manchester after four years away. He left abruptly out of guilt and anguish. Now he&#39;s returned, ostensibly for a party.
Shifty is a Pakistani, who Chris says was &#34;the smartest kid in class &#45; all A&#39;s.&#34; But now, living with his older brother, he is estranged from his parents and is selling drugs.
After four years Shifty and Chris still have a strong bond. Even though Chris bolted, Shifty stood by him loyally and defended his friend to his own detriment.
Chris has to deal with his past, and Shifty has to cope with a difficult present. One of Shifty&#39;s addicted customers mugs him and takes his supply. And Glen (Jason Flemyng), his supplier, is out to defeat him.
Shifty and Chris are side by side. Their unsettled existence is threatened by bursts of violence.
Writer/director Eran Creevy creates a deft paean to friendship. He sets the duo in an environment which is an arrangement of large, looming, bland buildings.
In that antiseptic environment, friendship is challenged and must struggle to prevail.
Creevy emphasizes the pair of friends together. There is a shot from behind of the two men sitting and talking with a tall building between them in the distance.
Another meaningful shot shows the pair conversing in front of a wall covered with graffiti all over it. Another shot is of both sitting and having a conversation. They are silhouetted before a lighted curtain.
Their conversations reveal their friendship. They share humor in remembering shared experiences.
Riz Ahmed effectively plays the title character with furtive eyes that can settle into a sharp stare. Daniel Mays provides nice chemistry as the unsettled Chris.
The music composed by Molly Nyman and Harry Escott has flair.
Friends talk.
In Shifty, friends talk well.

+++++++++
tonymacklin - aut:(23)
ID,autname,autlink
1 Josh Bell http://www.lasvegasweekly.com/staff/josh-bell/
2 Kathleen Noone
3 Pam Huber
19 None
5 Robert W. Welkos
7 Pauline Kael http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pauline_Kael
8 James Agee http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Agee
9 Dwight Macdonald http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dwight_Macdonald
10 John Simon http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Simon_(critic)
11 Stanley Kauffmann http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanley_Kauffmann

+++++++++
tonymacklin - books:(4)
ID,bname,pubyear,description,review
1 Voices from the Set: The Film Heritage Interviews 2000 In Voices from the Set, Tony Macklin shares with his readers the interviews he conducted during the 1970s with many of Hollywood's greatest stars. Because it was an era where the Old Hollywood was still extant, and the new cinema was burgeoning, he was able to meet the old with the new-actors, directors, producers, writers-and make some of his own memories along the way. Interviews with old masters Alfred Hitchcock and Howard Hawks are juxtaposed with the new breed Martin Scorsese and Alan Rudolph and the mavericks Robert Altman and Sam Peckinpah. Icons such as John Wayne and Edith Head are included, as well as relative newcomers Stockard Channing and Richard Baskin. Voices from the Set is a unique vignette of Hollywood history, a snapshot in time, ideal for the film buff, film historian, for anyone with an interest in the intriguing personalities that made it what it is today. This book is an opportunity not to be missed. "When teaching film and television in Los Angeles, I had the luxury of having top industry professionals visit my classes. This is simply not possible at universities distant from the major centers of production. However, with Tony Macklin's unique and special tome, I can have many of the all-time greats "visit" my class anywhere. Voices from the Set, will be required reading for all future "Masters of American Cinema" courses I teach -- anywhere...ever."
2 Palestra 1978 After a car accident, Marty Adams goes home in a police car. As he does, he thinks back over his past accomplishments and frustrations. He is broadcaster for the Philadelphia Eagles football team, and a galling and ceaseless frustration is the inability to win the big game. And, the Palestra, where as a young man he saw many college basketball games, represents an ideal which has lost its vitality. "I'm jealous. I think this is a very important book. I only wish I had written it. Palestra is the sports' Ragtime. -- Vince Staten (Louisville Times)
3 Beyond Justice 1995 In the three novellas is Beyond Justice, private detective Peter Owen Erskine embarks on an erratic search for identity in the modern world. In The Seventh Widow, Erskine searches for the perfect woman and the meaning of love. In The Ice Age, he seeks the meaning of age and responsibility. And in the third novella, Unfinished Business, Erskine tries to cope with his knowledge. "This is an entertaining, page-turning, pot-boiling, P-I romp. Peter fits into a fine tradition of oversexed sleuths, and his women are intriguing. I call this a good read, and I admire the author's ability to get a plot running and keep it running." -- John Daniel, Publisher
4 Little Boy Blue and the Golden Reunion 2007 Anniversaries bring out the best and worst of memories. They're also an opportunity for closure. And openness. On impulse, Jesse attends a fiftieth reunion. He returns to the "crimes" if his youth, but this time, murder challenges him to see himself and cope with the past. And the present. "You won't find better dialogue. It's funny, often poignant, and drives some very interesting characters. This dlightful read works on several levels. And anyone who has been to the Jersey shore will feel nostalgic for that experience." -- Al Bernstein, Showtime Boxing

+++++++++
tonymacklin - mov:(1302)
ID,mname,rating,relyear,aIDlist,mreviewed,mspecial,mlink1,mlink2
1 Quantum of Solace 5 2008 1,345 1 0 tt0830515 quantum_of_solace
2 Changeling 6 2008 2,141,193,282,343,566,815 1 0 tt0824747 1191742_changeling
3 W 7 2008 3,141,339 1 0 tt1175491 w_2008
4 Express, The 4 2008 4,172 1 0 tt0469903 1185801-the_express
5 Body of Lies 4 2008 5,172,226,313 1 0 tt0758774 10009225-body_of_lies
6 Ghost Town 5 2008 7 1 0 tt0995039 1190970-ghost_town
7 Righteous Kill 3 2008 8 1 0 tt1034331 righteous_kill
8 Burn After Reading 3 2008 9,270,421 1 0 tt0887883 burn_after_reading
9 Transsiberian 7 2008 10,141 1 0 tt0800241 transsiberian
10 Bottle Shock 6 2008 11 1 0 tt0914797 bottle_shock
91 Children of Men 5 2007 102 1 0 tt0206634 children_of_men
92 Good German, The 2 2007 103,421,525 1 0 tt0452624 good_german
93 Blood Diamond 3 2006 106 1 0 tt0450259 blood_diamond
94 Rachel Getting Married 3 2008 107,193,209 1 0 tt1084950 rachel_getting_married
95 What Just Happened 4 2008 107 1 1 tt0486674 what_just_happened
96 Appaloosa 6 2008 108 1 0 tt0800308 appaloosa
97 Synecdoche, New York 3 2008 109 1 0 tt0383028 synecdoche_new_york
98 Once in a Lifetime 4 2006 115 1 1 tt0489247 10006849-once_in_a_lifetime
99 Beer League 3 2006 115,1275 1 0 tt0453453 beer_league
100 G.I. Jesus 7 2006 116 1 1 tt0479042 gi_jesus
497 2012 2 2009 275,277,549 1 0 tt1190080 2012
498 Damned United, The 6 2009 276,277 1 0 tt1226271 damned_united
499 Everybody&#39;s Fine 4 2009 277 1 0 tt0780511 1211197-everybodys_fine
500 Stanno tutti bene 7 1990 277 1 1 tt0100681 1037851-everybodys_fine
501 Nanny McPhee 4 2005 277 1 1 tt0396752 1153987-nanny_mcphee
502 Waking Ned 5 1998 277 1 1 tt0166396 waking_ned_devine
503 Fantastic Mr. Fox 6 2009 279 1 0 tt0432283 1197696-fantastic_mr_fox
504 Rushmore 4 1998 278 1 1 tt0128445 rushmore
505 Royal Tenenbaums, The 4 2001 278 1 1 tt0265666 royal_tenenbaums
506 Blind Side, The 3 2009 280,295,415,430,571,589 1 0 tt0878804 1212694-blind_side
1004 Kill Your Darlings 3 2013 580 1 0 tt1311071 kill_your_darlings_2013
1005 Blood Brother 4 2013 581 1 0 tt2265179 blood_brother
1006 Hunger Games: Catching Fire, The 6 2013 583 1 0 tt1951264 the_hunger_games_catching_fire
1007 Her 4 2013 584,671 1 0 tt1798709 her
1008 Philomena 5 2013 585 1 0 tt2431286 philomena
1009 Nebraska 5 2013 586,664 1 0 tt1821549 nebraska
1010 King of Marvin Gardens, The 8 1972 586 1 1 tt0068805 king_of_marvin_gardens
1011 American Hustle 5 2013 587 1 0 tt1800241 american_hustle

+++++++++
tonymacklin - ori:(35)
ID,oname,olink
1 Fayetteville Free Weekly http://freeweekly.com
2 Bright Lights Film Journal http://www.brightlightsfilm.com
3 Combustible Celluloid http://www.combustiblecelluloid.com
4 Las Vegas Weekly http://www.lasvegasweekly.com
5 Las Vegas CityLife
6 Villanova Magazine http://www1.villanova.edu/villanova/unicommunication/publications/magazine.html
7 Campus Report
8 Film Comment http://www.filmcomment.com/
9 Los Angeles Times http://www.latimes.com
10 University of Dayton Review

+++++++++
tonymacklin - reviews:(139)
ID,movID,autID,revlink
1 152 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/g1.html
2 137 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/g3.html
3 130 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/b1.html
4 117 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/b1.html
5 135 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/c3.html
6 128 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/f1.html
7 119 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/g3.html
8 162 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/g4.html
9 132 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/j2.html
10 139 7 http://www.geocities.com/paulinekaelreviews/m2.html
97 37 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/key
98 53 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/grrrr-woof-rhetoric-packed-bloviating-lions-lambs-lacks-killer-instinct
99 54 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/saga-corruption-heroin-and-charisma-ridley-scott-delivers-socko-entertainment-american-gangster
100 50 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/just-shoot-me-nihilism-crashes-lumet-and-coen-bros
101 58 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/fixer-upper
102 62 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/lovable-feast-old-friend-offers-cure-war-weary
103 63 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/russian-roulette
104 51 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/jesse-james-hits-its-target-pitt-western-swaggers-straight-soul
105 204 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/jodie-foster-neil-jordan-merge-brilliantly-tale-hell
106 64 12 http://www.observer.com/2007/training-day

+++++++++
tonymacklin - typ:()

+++++++++

 
